                 A Panoramic View of The Outer Darkness
                                              By Marty Cauley
                                                  5/25/2008

The following material is an overview of the oral and visual presentation I made in a workshop at
 the 2006 GES Conference. It refers to illustrations in my upcoming book The Outer Darkness,
 which I presented to the group in a Power Point presentation. These illustrations will be available
 in the book. The current plans are to update that Power Point presentation and provide this
 discussion below with it in an accompanying CD within the book when it is released. The need
 for an updated presentation is apparent in that the number of illustrations has grown from the
 approximately 300 I mentioned then two years ago in the text below to nearly 500 now.
 1)      Introduction
           I was first introduced to the rewards view of the outer darkness in 1985 when I read Hodges’
 book, Grace in Eclipse. At the time I was attending Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary, where
 I graduated in 1988 as a co-recipient of the Advanced Greek Award. My goal was eventually to
 become a teacher since I thoroughly enjoy biblical research. I found out about GES in 1989 and joined
 it immediately and began reading everything I could from a Free Grace (FG) perspective, including
 the older works cited in Hodges’ bibliography such as Lang, which in turn led to Govett. I also wrote
 Arlen Chitwood in 1989 for rewards related material. So from the very beginning, I have had exposure
 to a cross spectrum of FG related views concerning the outer darkness that ranged from considering it
 nothing more than a parabolic description of losing rewards to a literal imprisonment in Gehenna
 during the millennium.
           Charles Stanley’s book, Eternal Security, came out the next year, 1990. Like Stanley, I was a
 Southern Baptist. I naively thought that if I shared copies of his book with our Southern Baptist
 congregation that the church would be receptive to my teaching on the outer darkness. After all, he
 was a Southern Baptist Convention president and had expressed his view that the outer darkness
 pertained to rewards in his book. So I thought I would be able to do the same in my sermons. I was
 convinced that the outer darkness was a pivotal GES issue that could be used to distinguish FG from
 LS in such a way that could be easily understood by the laity but at the same time powerfully urge the
 laity to submit to the Lordship of Christ from a FG perspective. So I studied the outer darkness and
 related material intently and preached on it and related themes frequently.
           Subsequently, in 1992 while exploring the context of the outer darkness passage in the Mt.
 Olivet Discourse, I wrote Hodges and stated my preference for disassociating the outer darkness with
 eternal damnation in all three Matthean passages. He concurred and stated that he had come to the
 same conclusion as a result of Mike Huber’s thesis on the subject. So naturally, I got a copy of that
 thesis. A similar thesis by Gregory Sapaugh had just been released in 1991, so naturally I also read
 this thesis. An abridged version of both theses was soon put into print in JOTGES.1
           I was in my second pastorate at this time and began asking our members why God should let
 them into heaven and providing them with a FG answer. I also urged submission to the Lordship of
 Christ, warning that the outer darkness was a real (albeit metaphorical) danger for those believers who
 did not submit to Christ’s Lordship. The deacons told me to quit asking why God should let people
 into heaven and to stop preaching on novel things like the outer darkness. This type of preaching
 resulted in my termination on Feb 28, 1993. My second child was born the next night. It was a very
 difficult time, and I have been in the outer darkness of pastoral ministry ever since as a result.
           So as I stand here before you on March 1, 2006, to speak on the outer darkness, please note
 that this marks my thirteenth anniversary of sojourning in the outer darkness of pastoral ministry as a
 result of preaching on the outer darkness from a GES perspective. It was thirteen years ago today that
 I embarked upon this nomadic existence outside the pastorate. Despite my efforts to return to the
 pastorate, I have been unable to do so as a result of that termination. It has been suggested that if I
 would keep my mouth shut on such controversial matters as the outer darkness that I would be able to


                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
return to the pastorate. For me personally, this is not an option.1 But during this exile, I have put my
seminary and Greek background to use in continuing my research on the outer darkness. And I remain
firmly persuaded that my conviction that the outer darkness is a rewards issue is correct.
          From my background, it is readily apparent that the outer darkness is not a mere academic
interest for me personally. Nevertheless, the nature of my presentation will tend to be academic in that
the material I have to share is the result of my interaction with competing and opposing research that I
have addressed along the way in these many years of research. I have composed a 2,000 page
manuscript that examines the outer darkness in its biblical, historical, hermeneutical, and
theological contexts. My manuscript is a systematic misthology (which is my coined term for
doctrine related to rewards—misthos). My research affirms the GES understanding of the outer
darkness as a misthological theme. This panoramic overview will highlight some of the more
interesting features of this material by browsing a sampling of illustrations from the manuscript. I
use about 300 illustrations in the manuscript to make it more comprehensible to the laity. I will
summarize my findings here by means of some of the key 50 illustrations.
2)       Ventilato’s election objection
         a) Election guarantees the results

            i) Soteriological salvation (2Thess 2:13)
        Ventilato, who has a long letter on the Internet opposing GES, believes that election
unconditionally guarantees our inheritance just as it does our salvation:

                  Notice too that, according to the inspired words of James 2:5, our
         inheritance of the kingdom of God is based on His election (thus according
         to grace): for God has “chosen” us to be “heirs of the kingdom.” Just as
         every believer has been chosen out of the world by God in eternity past unto
         salvation (2 Thess. 2:13), likewise has every believer been chosen out by
         God in eternity past to inherit the kingdom of God. (Emphasis his.)2

             ii) Soteriological inheritance (Jam 2:5)
        Since my premise is that the outer darkness is the experience of disinherited believers, I must
provide a misthological defense of the inheritance and explain why election does not necessarily
prevent failure. For example, Eph 1:4 may be taken to mean that God has predetermined that believers
will (W) be in Christ and that they should (S) live holy lives. Does this election mean that it is

     1
       Subsequent note: With exquisite detail, Daniel Gracely describes why those who have the gift
of prophecy/proclamation do not tend to make good pastors: “Christians with the gift of proclamation
may frequently also have some measure of the gift of knowledge into mysteries (i.e., included here
would presumably be things that at first glance appear contradictory and therefore difficult of
perception), so that their warnings have a greater sense of urgency.…This is because the proclaimer
senses an immediacy about some divine warning to the church and understands that God is warning
the Body against some disastrous course or doctrinal disease.…Most prophets would be lousy pastors
because their often blunt and serious approach can leave people feeling they are impatient and
unsympathetic” (emphasis his). His whole discussion is worthy of reading for those who would like to
understand the pragmatic effects of this gift. In subsequent years, I likewise have come to conclude
that my being gifted in the areas of prophecy/proclamation and knowledge/utterance make it difficult
to be a pastor. In some ways, the pragmatic effects of the gift of prophecy might even be regard as the
curse of prophecy. God’s people have a history of killing the prophets sent to them (Mt 23:37). Today,
the church just marginalizes the prophets sent to her as the preferred means (although not only means)
of silencing them. Gracely, 126-134. See “The Church: Equal Justice For All” at
http://www.xcalvinist.com/207/m-chapter-10/.
                             For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                              Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                Misthologist@misthology.org
impossible for believers to live unholy lives? If so, then the outer darkness would be a misthological
impossibility. But this is not the case since we have both ongoing contingency and non-contingency
within this verse.

         b) Response

              i) Soteriological predestination only guarantees soteriological results
         By way of overview, Ventilato’s assumption that Jam 2:5 proves unconditional
soteriological election is exceedingly weak. The election in Jam 2:5 is neither unconditional nor
soteriological. It does not unconditionally apply to the poor, or to all believers for that matter, nor is it
soteriological election. It is dependent upon the richness of our faith. We must conclude from this
verse that election is not necessarily soteriological. Our salvation from eternal damnation is not
conditioned on our love for God or magnitude of our faith. Rather, it is conditioned on His love for us
and the object of our faith.
         What about 2Thess 2:13? Does this verse not use talk about election unto salvation? Yes, it
does. But the question that must still be addressed is whether or not this salvation and corresponding
election is soteriological, that is, does it pertain to eternal damnation? So fundamentally we must
answer the question, “What kind of salvation is in view?” The answer to this question will in turn
determine what kind of predestination is under discussion. These issues will be addressed below as we
investigate the primary passage on the topic of predestination.

             ii) Golden Chain (Rom 8:29-30)

                     (1) Predestination
           The golden chain in Rom 8:29-30 is, of course, the classic passage used to defend eternal
security from the premise of predestination. Supposedly, predestination unconditionally predetermines
the result in this passage. So if there is a text that could be used to prove Ventilato’s argument, this
should be it. We will address the second verb, predestination, in this chain of events first as a result.
Since the time of Calvin’s son-in-law and successor, Beza, the five verbs of this passage have been
considered an unbreakable chain by Calvinists. See Illustration 1. Chain of Rom 8:29-30. Perkins
wrote A Golden Chain in 1591 and dedicated it to Beza. This chain supposedly assures the elect of
perseverance. But Arminius provided a rebuttal in 1612. Reasoner condenses the essential difference
between these two camps to a cause-and-effect relationship between predestination and perseverance:
“According to both Perkins and Arminius, if the believer does not persevere, such a person proves to
be non-elect. The difference is that Perkins taught that believers persevere because they were elected.
Arminius taught that God elects believers whom he foresees will persevere.”3 According to Perkins, if
you are predestined, then you will persevere. See Illustration 2. Predestined Perseverance. Arminius’
rejoinder was that if you persevere then you are predestined. According to one, predestination causes
perseverance, while the other claims the reverse. See Illustration 3. Perseverance Based
Predestination.
           Either view is detrimental to FG soteriology since both views condition one’s glorification
upon one’s perseverance. That is, whether or not you reach heaven is contingent upon your
perseverance. Both views are counter to my FG misthology. After all, how can believers wind up in
the outer darkness if this golden chain assures their perseverance? Calvinists and Arminians can both
agree that those who persevere will be secure when they reach heaven. See Illustration 4.
Unconditional Security for the Perseverer. But the same objection may be raised to both: Reaching
heaven is contingent upon perseverance. But since perseverance in faith is a contributing factor to our
rewards in heaven, it is a misthological contingency. Therefore, both systems teach salvation by
works. Works are an exegetical requirement to reach heaven. Popular arguments for eternal security
fair little better in avoiding this objection.
           Advocates of this simplistic approach include Norman Geisler and Gordon Olson.4 According
to Geisler, perseverance in faith is guaranteed by God and is a demonstration or manifestation rather
than condition of one’s salvation. But although Geisler denies that you are saved by faithfulness, he
                               For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                  Misthologist@misthology.org
falls into using the adage about works: You are not saved by faith and works but by faith that works.
One might summarize his view on faith accordingly: You are not saved by perseverance in faith but
by faith that perseveres. This is nothing but useless rhetoric. When it comes down to exegetical
consistency, Geisler flounders and claims that we are saved through persevering faith in 1Pet 1:5.5
          Olson fairs little better. To his credit, he acknowledges the punctiliar nature of the condition,
so our illustration correctly portrays his position of simplistic security.6 But when discussing the
golden chain, he says that loving God is a description rather than condition of those who meet the
chain’s application.7 He seems to regard 1Pet 1:5 as a promise of a protected faith rather than
condition of protection by faith.8 Still, it would appear that if you were to lose your faith then you
would lose your salvation, despite Olson’s assurance that this is impossible. Despite Olson’s
supposition, perseverance in faith appears conditional in 1Cor 15:1-2 and Col 1:22-23 and not merely
descriptive of true believers.9 Olson seeks to divorce faith from assurance so that he can affirm
perseverance in faith for those who lose present assurance.10 But this is an exceedingly awkward
arrangement. Of the five warnings in Hebrews, the one he applies to genuine believers is the third one
in Heb 6:4-6, which leads us to question his exegetical consistency. Although both Geisler and Olson,
to their credit, can acknowledge that this particular warning in Hebrews is to genuine believers, their
view on perseverance causes them to shrink back from acknowledging that apostasy is a possibility.
          The same basic objection may be raised in response to this simplistic argument for eternal
security as was raised above concerning Calvinism and Arminianism. You cannot reach heaven apart
from perseverance in faith, not even hypothetically, according to this simplistic securitist view. To be
sure, advocates of this position will say that those who fail to persevere were never genuine believers.
But this is the same evasive manure used by Calvinists, but it fails to circumvent the problem. As the
ruder of the Titanic was too small to save the ship from collision with the iceberg, so this evasive
manure is too weak to avoid the conclusion that entrance into heaven is conditioned on perseverance.
When this view is examined from right to left in the illustration, that is, from the perspective of
entrance into heaven, the only ones who will reach heaven are those who persevere. So we must object
to it on the same basis that we object to the other two positions.
          But there is another objection to the simplistic view of security. For the moment, let us brush
aside the problem outlined above. This simplistic view of predestination will still not work. It fails to
adequately deal with Ventilato’s comments regarding Jam 2:5 and 2Thess 2:13. And Ventilato’s
objection fails to take into consideration that God has not unconditionally or irresistibly elected the
poor, or certain ones among the poor, to be rich in faith and love Him. The result of God’s election in
this verse is contingent upon the free response of the poor. In God’s election, you get the deciding
vote in this verse. The same is true in 2Thess 2:13-14.
          Olson correctly perceives that the calling in this verse is not accomplished immediately
through irresistible grace but intermediately through faith in the gospel that was preached to them and
that this calling is thus conditioned on their free response for its fulfillment.11 Olson is on the
threshold of acknowledging that the outcome of election is contingent upon the response of the free
agent. But whereas Olson stands on the threshold, Eaton clearly steps across it: “I suspect there is a
difference between irresistile [sic] predestination to salvation, and resistible predestination to
inheritance.”12 This is the model of predestination I hold and labor vigorously to defend. Lopez is
clearly thinking along the same lines when he identifies the misthological nature of the predestination
in the second link of the chain: “God’s purpose in foreknowledge and predestination is that suffering
believers may share with Christ (i.e. He) in firstborn privileges (cf. cf. [sic] vv 14-15, 17-22)…will
have special status as firstborn…who will reign with Christ since they also suffered with Him (v 17; 2
Tim 2:12; Heb 1:9; 3:14; Rev 2:26).”13
          Illustration 5. Should/Would is the heart of my argument and shows that predestination may
incorporate soteriological and misthological contingencies. And Illustration 6. Predestination
distinguishes soteriological and misthological selection in a manner that does not rule out our free
response. God has not only determined what should (S) happen but what will (W) happen. Once a
person believes in Christ, that person is in Christ and will (W) necessarily be in the kingdom. I picture
the outer darkness as inside the kingdom in the illustration. Some of my friends have asked if I am a
kingdom exclusionist. The answer is spatially, “No,” but experientially, “Yes.” I believe that outer

                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
darkness is an experience within the kingdom. From the diagram, you may ascertain that I hold to
particular prescient predestination that is contingent upon our free response but that nevertheless
affirms eternal security. Therefore, I might be described as a Reformed Arminian Securitist. I agree
with the Reformed camp that predestination deals with particular persons, not just a corporate class of
people. I concur with Arminians that the outcome of predestination is contingent upon our free
response. Nevertheless, I affirm eternal security. Once you are in Christ you are limited to one of two
possible outcomes, neither of which involve eternal damnation in the lake of fire. So we see how a
misthological view of predestination is genuinely compatible with free agency. Unlike Calvinistic
compatibilism, in our model you can act contrary to the desires God gives you and thus end up in
either hell or the outer darkness.

                   (2) Foreknowledge
         What about foreknowledge—the first link of the chain? Calvinists argue that foreknowledge
is deterministic and renders the future certain in a manner that is incompatible with genuine free
agency. In my chapter on pre-temporal election, I give what might be considered a rather standard
argument for eternal security that is both Free Grace (FG) and Free Will (FW). The links are
sequential and distinctive. Foreknowledge is not causative, but may refer to God’s prior knowledge of
who will believe.14 See Illustration 7. Not Forechosen from a Calvanistic Perspective and
Illustration 8. Calvinistic Foreknowledge. Predestination is contingent on our initial free will
response but not on our ongoing free will response. God has predetermined that believers will reach
glory in heaven. The efficaciousness of the call is based on our punctiliar free intellectual response.
But our free response irrevocably results in our justification. And justification will certainly without
fail result in our soteriological glorification. After all, if I am going to argue, contrary to Arminians,
that apostate believers are thrown into the outer darkness rather than into hell, I must provide a
defense for unconditional security. So I could certainly be satisfied with a status quo defense of
eternal security from this passage. But I am not satiated with the classic securitist position because
there is more to this passage than a simplistic affirmation of eternal security (as indicated above in my
discussion of predestination).
         Of course, Calvinists will argue that my view of foreknowledge is too simple. For those who
prefer a more comprehensive response, I opt for a modification of Craig’s view of middle knowledge
but reject his view of time. For views of time, see Illustration 9. Helm: Simply Timeless—Timeless
View Of God and Illustration 10. Five Views of God and Time. But as to foreknowledge itself, I take my
view of foreknowledge (see Illustration 11. Foreknowledge is Foresight) and add a modification of
Craig’s view. See Illustration 12. Logical Sequence of Knowledge. You will note that my
modification is an amplification which pictures things as they could, should, would, will, and must
happen. What would happen is middle knowledge. But for those who prefer something that is easier to
understand, I offer Picirilli’s model. He provides an overview based on three words: Certainty,
Contingency, and Necessity.15 See Illustration 13. Two Types of Certainty.

                   (3) Called
         Bryson was on the right track in affirming multiple types of calls and that this call in the
golden chain is to believers.16 Although I disagree with him that it is a call to simple glorification
salvation, the critical element of his argument is valid. In terms of logical sequence, the call is to those
who are already believers when they receive the call. In Illustration 14. Ordo Salutis—Marrowistic,
you will note that the sequence is:

                              Vociferation—Invitation to misthological co-heirship
                              Justification—Imputation of Forensic Righteousness

         The call in Illustration 15. Atemporal and Temporal Stairs likewise is not limited to the
gospel of grace but entails the full gospel of the kingdom, that is, the invitation to co-rulership to those
who love God and who conform to the moral image of His Son. Illustration 16. Calvinistic Staircase
and Illustration 17.Ordo Salutis—Calvinistic show that the Calvinistic ordo salutis is built upon a

                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
foundation of soteriological predestination that poses a two-phased regeneration. This two-phased
regeneration allows Calvinists to claim that regeneration precedes faith but that faith precedes new
birth.
         In contrast, Illustration 18. Marrowistic Staircase affirms free agency and regards
predestination itself in this chain to be moral and therefore a misthological precursor to the
misthological call. Regeneration is single-phased and is grounded in justification, in clear
contradistinction to Calvinism. The call is clearly labeled as misthological.
         Like Bryson, Lopez correctly affirms soteriological glorification as the conclusion. This is a
soteriological chain that affirms eternal security with two misthological links within that chain:
predestination and vociferation. This combination of soteriology and misthology as distinct elements
are clearly articulated by Paul earlier in this chapter:
        16
          The Spirit Himself bears witness with our spirit that we are children of
        God, 17 and if children, then heirs also: on the one hand, heirs of God, but on
        the other hand, co-heirs with Christ, if indeed we co-suffer with Him in
        order that we may also be co-glorified with Him. (Rom 8:16-17; TM)

         God has predestined us to rule with Christ and has called (invited) us to do so. But whether or
not we will do so is contingent on our free will response. However, our simple glorification—the last
link of the chain—is unconditionally assured. I am not insensitive to the argument that the
predestination in this passage is to the moral conformation of Christ. I agree. The goal is moral
conformity and resulting misthological rulership. Since God has predestined that it should happen, He
has taken the steps necessary to make it contingently possible by means of prevenient grace for the
unbeliever and enabling grace for the believer. This passage has a special promise to those believers
who love Christ but not all believers will do so. Conversion is being persuaded that one has become
saved by faith alone in Christ alone. The chain culminates in simple soteriological glorification of all
those who experience conversion. Eternal security is thus assured; misthological rulership is not.

              iii) Misthological predestination in 1Thess 5:9
         So if a passage as fundamental to the topic of predestination as Rom 8:28-30 could
conceivably be referring to misthological predestination, as Lopez believes, then how much more
could its conceptual parallel in 2Thess 2:13! This passage is talking about salvation through
sanctification, and like Eph 1:4, there is no compelling reason to limit this to pre-conversion
sanctification. This election appears to be unto moral conformation, just like Rom 8:28-29. In
Illustration 19. Parallelism of 1Thess 5:8-11 and 2Thess 2:13-15, I unquestionably treat both
passages as dealing with misthological themes.

                 (1) Majority/minority view
         However, affirming the misthological nature of the salvation in 1Thess 5:9 does not weaken
the defense by Hodges and Edgar of an unconditional full pre-tribulational rapture for all believers.17
They took the minority view that the passage assures all believers that they will be live with the Lord
via the rapture whether they are morally asleep or not. The majority view has not found this position
persuasive because it seems to wipe out the grounds for the exhortation. It is as if Paul were saying,
“Live for the Lord because whether or not you live for the Lord you will live with the Lord!” On the
one hand, Hodges has given a splendid argument and grounded the exhortation in gratitude, but it does
seem strange that Paul’s exhoration is based on nothing more than thankfulness according to this
view.

                 (2) Misthological resolution
         My mediation strenghtens the argument made by both Hodges and Edgar. A misthological
resolution between these two positions removes the majority objection to Hodges’ FG soteriology.


                             For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                              Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                Misthologist@misthology.org
This salvation in 1Thess 5:9 is misthological and is distinct from the tribulational delieverance in
1Thess 1:10.

             iv) Misthological election does not guarantee misthological realization
         The misthological realization of predestination is conditioned on our determination.
Illustration 20. Election (eklego) has Jam 2:5 charted as dealing with co-glorification salvation.
Likewise, Mt 22:14 also deals with misthological election. Just as in Rom 8:29 we are called to inherit
co-rulership of the kingdom, so likewise in Mt 22:14 we are called (invited) to do so. But few
believers will actually be chosen to do so. Whether or not we are chosen to rule with Christ is based
on our performance and love for Christ, as denoted by our wedding clothes. Contrary to some,
whether or not the host provides that garment is not a crucial detail. Even if the garment refers to
imparted righteousness that is available to all believers, it does not necessarily follow that all believers
will dress themselves in the practical expression of their faith. In God’s election, He has made a
positive response by the free agent possible but not certain. The misthological categorization still
remains. See Illustration 21. Unworthy Guest (Mt 22:1-14).

             v) Misthological salvation statistics
         Since the phrase outer darkness occurs exclusively in Matthew, I have paid special attention
to that gospel, providing (for example) a chart that summarizes its statistical use of the word salvation.
See Illustration 22. Primary and Secondary References to Salvation in Mt. Matthew uses salvation
misthologically just as often as he does soteriologically. Incidentally, you may notice that the chart
does not have a separate category for glorification salvation verses co-glorification salvation. The
explanation is simple. In terms of linguistic usage, the word salvation (sozo/soteria) is never used with
the word glory (doxa/doxazo) in Matthew (nor in the NT for that matter) to refer to simple unmerited
glory. The proleptic aorist in Rom 8:24 is no exception. One may compare Illustration 23. Analysis
of NT salvation and Illustration 24. Pie Chart of NT Salvation for similar findings.
3)      Zeller and Brown object to misthological inheritance
        a) Misthological inheritance
         Brown’s dissertation is indeed a well written piece of research that has even attracted a
following from among FG writers such as Bing and Lopez. However, Brown is unable to provide a
satisfactory explanation for Col 3:24-25.18 Zeller’s criticism pertaining to the inheritance can be found
at the same web site as Ventilato above.19 But Zeller does not have integrity enough to even point out
the potential relationship that Dillow brings out between verses 8 and 9, that is, between brethren
being unrightous and not inheriting the kingdom.

                 But you [Corinthian believers] are being unrighteous and unfair,
        doing this even to your own brethren. 9 Do you not know the unrighteous
        will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived; neither fornicators,
        nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor homosexuals, 10 nor thieves,
        nor the covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor swindlers, will inherit the
        kingdom of God. 11 And such were some of you; but you were washed, but
        you were sanctified, but you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus
        Christ, and in the Spirit of our God. (1Cor 6:8-11; TM)

        In response to Ventilato, I have pointed out from Jam 2:5 the misthological nature of the
inheritance of the kingdom as being conditioned on richness in faith and love of God: “Listen, my
beloved brethren: did not God choose the poor of this world to be rich in faith and heirs of the
kingdom which He promised to those who love Him?” (Jam 2:5)



                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
        b) Inheritance of kingdom conditioned on our degree of faith and
           love (Jam 2:5)

              i) Lopez
         As pointed out above, Lopez, in his commentary on Romans, acknowledges that not all
believers love God in Rom 8:28 and that predestination in 8:29-30 pertains to co-glorification of those
believers who do love God. I agree. Only those believers who love God will achieve the realization of
the misthological predestination in Rom 8:29. But Lopez’s admission that not all believers love God
in Rom 8:28 should have led him to at least address the fact that the inheritance of the kingdom is
conditioned on one’s love for God in Jam 2:5. And yet he is silent on this verse in his article which
claims all believers will inherit the kingdom in the vice list passages.20
         However, I understand James to be in complete harmony with Paul. Our inheritance of the
kingdom as a believer is conditioned on the richness of our faith in God and our love for God. Like
Hodges, I would find the inheritance of the kingdom misthologically limited to those believers who
are rich in faith and love God in Jam 2:5.21 Therefore, in contrast to Lopez, I take the degree view of
faith. See Illustration 25. Growing Faith.
         Lopez has followed Brown in advocating the inheritance of the world as being a
soteriological concept in Rom 4:13. In doing so, Lopez has rejected the notion that there can be
degrees of faith in Rom 4:21.22 I counter that this planetary inheritance is misthological (Mt 5:5) and
deal with the land promises in doing so. I defend the degree of faith as being a misthological issue.
         Both James and Paul teach a justification/righteousness by works (Rom 6:16; Jam 2:21,24).
Dillow pointed this out long ago, and Lopez concurs that Paul is referring to moral righteousness.23
But the agreement between James and Paul goes much deeper than that simple observation. What I am
about to share, has been anticipated to a considerable extent by Eaton.24 As pictured in Illustration 26.
Footbridge of Faith, Romans 4:12 is a misthological footbridge to the misthological imputation of
righteousness in Rom 4:22. Those who “follow in the steps of the faith of our father Abraham” will
have righteousness misthologically imputed to them as a result. Both James and Paul teach a
misthological imputation of righteousness by God. This bema righteousness is conditioned on the
quality and quantity of our faith. It was because of the richness of Abraham’s faith in v. 21 that
righteousness was imputed to him in v. 22.
         Also, according to Jesus, it was evidently because of Abraham’s great faith that he will rule in
the kingdom as a son of the kingdom rather than be thrown into the outer darkness as such (Mt 8:10-
12). If Abraham had wavered in faith rather than grown strong in faith, Abraham himself would have
been cast into the outer darkness.

             ii) Keathley IV
         In his rebuttal of the GES understanding of the outer darkness, Keathley IV posts a chart
which pictures the first passage on the outer darkness in Mt 8:12 as being a distinction between those
who have faith and those who do not.25 See Illustration 27. Keathley’s Kingdom Banquet. I counter
that the context is commending “great faith” (Mt 8:10) as the basis for inclusion in the banquet. See
my Illustration 28. Matthew’s Kingdom Banquet. There is a common thread between the rich faith of
the poor, the full unwavering persuasion of Abraham, and the great faith of the centurion. They inherit
the kingdom and the earth and dine in the banquet because of the magnitude of their faith. The
inheritance of the kingdom is a reward contingent upon the richness of your faith. Inheritance of the
land is a misthological motif. See Illustration 29. Achan’s Lack of Rest. Admittedly, this position
posses difficulties, such as the land grants to Abraham. I have dealt with those difficulties in the
manner suggested by Ross and Dillow in affirming that Abraham was a believer long before he
offered up Isaac. My theory is that the land promises to Abraham were expanded to include
misthological rulership of the land as a result of his misthological imputation.




                             For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                              Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                Misthologist@misthology.org
4)      Extra biblical
        a) Brown
          And I am not convinced that those in the FG movement, such as Lopez, who have made
concessions to Brown have been able to successfully integrate those concessions without making a
misthological compromise. I would urge considerable caution in appealing to intertestamental
literature as a hermeneutical filter by which to evaluate our FG exegesis.

        b) Pagenkemper

             i) Enochian Darkness
        Pagenkemper has written a two-part article opposed to GES view of outer darkness that
likewise draws in part upon intertestamental literature. In my research, I devote an entire chapter to
dealing with the Enochian background of the outer darkness in which I defend the misthological view
of the vice list and outer darkness. Both 1 Enoch and Jude are referring to the same soteriological
darkness and eternal damnation. I chart and interact with this material, as may be seen in Illustration
30. Confinement in Darkness and Fire in 1 Enoch and Illustration 31. Confinement in Darkness
and Fire in 2 Enoch. But salvation from the darkness in 1 Enoch is dependent on faith and works?
Will we in FG follow 1 Enoch in advocating a soteriology that is conditioned on faith and works?
I hope not! Salvation from the darkness in 2 Enoch is plainly conditioned on works. If we are
going to adopt Enochian soteriology, we must abandon free grace in order to do so.

        c) Soteriological Darkness of Jude
         This is not to say that Jesus or Jude did not draw upon the imagery of the darkness found in
Enoch. Jude certainly did so, and there is no reason to insist that Jesus could not have done so as well.
The judgment referred to in Jude 1:14-15 is the same as 1En 1:9. But unlike Enoch, we will contend
that salvation from this soteriological darkness is by simple faith.

        d) Misthological darkness of Matthew

               i) Enoch’s misthological palace motif
         It is quite possible that Jesus might have partially drawn upon the dinner motif in 2 Enoch as
an interesting background for the Matthean banquet motif found in both the first and second passages
on the outer darkness.

                When the last [righteous] one arrives, he [the Lord] will bring out
        Adam, together with the ancestors; and he will bring them in there…just as a
        person invites his best friends to have dinner with him…and they talk
        together in front of that man’s palace, waiting with joyful anticipation to
        have dinner. (2En 43:5)

         At the consummation of this age, there will be an eschatological dinner in paradise to which
all of God’s friends are invited. To go outside and to be outside the banquet in paradise does not mean
to go out of paradise or to be outside of paradise. There is potential parallel to the outer darkness in Mt
8:11-12 and 22:1-13.

             ii) Misthological Vice List
         And there is another passage in 2 Enoch, which in connection with a vice list, may in fact
explicitly denote that the inheritance is a reward (2En 9:1; 10:4-6). In any event, Enoch clearly cannot
be used as a soteriological filter since it cannot distinguish its soteriology from its misthology.
Although 1 Enoch teaches salvation by faith and works, in contrast to 2 Enoch (which teaches
                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
salvation by works), it would be wrong to assume that this means that 1 Enoch teaches salvation by
simple faith. It is simply not there.
5)      Ultra-misthologists
         There are ultra-misthologists who would equate the darkness of Jude with that of the outer
darkness as a picture of Gehenna. I do not. It is not because I object to picturing Gehenna as
subterranean soteriological imprisonment. In fact my Illustration 32. Paradise Removed is very
similar to that of Whipple, who is a Gehenna misthologist.26 Rather, it is my assessment that all OT
believers are with the Lord. And Hodges has demonstrated that all NT believers will be with the Lord
via the rapture. I picture all believers as being with the Lord in the Heavenly Jerusalem until the
commencement of the millennial kingdom, at which time unfaithful believers will be excluded from
the city. See Illustration 33. Heavenly Jerusalem and Illustration 34. Cast Out and Gathered Out.
And they will be outside the city looking in for eternity. See Illustration 35. Outside the City and
Illustration 36. Outside Looking In. Rewards are eternal. So in one sense of the word, my view is
much more severe than that of some Gehenna misthologists who believe that at the end of the
millennium, distinction in rewards are nullified.
         Conservative misthologists locate outer darkness inside kingdom and hold that all
believers will enter the kingdom. Ultra-misthologists, on the other hand, restrict kingdom
entrance to faithful believers. My mediating proposal is that a text such as Acts 14:22 refers to
experiential rather than spatial kingdom exclusion. See Illustration 37. Two Doors? So in
Illustration 38. Kingdom Entrance I have a chart as to whether basileia denotes kingdom versus
kingship. Not all believers will enter the kingship—the experience of rulership. Some believers
are experientially excluded from the basileia.
6)      Concessions
        a) Dillow
         The arguments by Gehenna misthologists such as Faust are not without their persuasive
force.27 In fact, at a GES conference Dillow has now taken what would be akin to a preterist view of
Gehenna (focusing on the temporal wrath in 70 A.D. and denying that aionios necessarily means
eternal), but he has applied a misthological twist to the typical preterist view so that Gehenna now
metaphorically refers to the temporal and misthological loss of one’s soul in his modified view.28 I do
not adopt this concession.

        b) Walvoord
         However, I do acknowledge Walvoord’s limitations. Unquenchable fire does not necessarily
mean eternal fire in the OT. Forever may be used as a relative term in the OT. And all can be used in
a relative manner. The arguments are employed by ultra-misthologists, Calvinists, and Universalists.
So I have to counter each of their views while making such concessions. In doing so, I concur with
Walvoord that aionios may still be taken as referring to eternity in the NT, when the Illustration 39.
Three forms of Eternity is taken into consideration, and I integrate this prospective with time theory.

        c) Telescopic Fusion
          My resolution is pictured in Illustration 40. Millennial and Eternal Worms. Isaiah (66:23-
24) saw the worms in the unquenchable fire gnawing the bodies of those within it. This has been
pictured in the illustration by a foot in the flames of fire with a worm-infested foot. Isaiah saw the
millennial and eternal aspects of this reality merged together. He could not distinguish the short period
of time that would have taken place between the millennial state and eternal state in this prophetic
picture that the Lord gave him at that time. But the picture becomes progressively clearer in the NT.
The same type of fulfillment will be experienced in both states—literal fulfillment. The flames will
literally burn and the worms will literally gnaw. However, when it comes to the NT period, the eternal


                             For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                              Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                Misthologist@misthology.org
aspect of this punishment is exclusively in view. Jesus is only pointing to the second mountain peak,
not to the first one.
7)      Ventilato’s bridal objection
          Ventilato provides a long refutation of the FG misthological position, the first part of which is
based on the premise that the body of Christ and the bride form an organic unity with Christ and as
such cannot be divided and part of the bride be put into outer darkness. The body of Christ is one
and thus jointly called Christ, just as Adam and Eve were jointly referred to as Adam (1Cor 12:12;
Gen 5:2). All believers must share an “indivisibility, unity, and universality of experience”
(emphasis his).29
          This is one of his better counters to GES, and the response by conservative misthologists is
not persuasive. Dillow suggests, “The wedding garment…adorns the bride as a whole and not
each individual saint of which she is composed. Each saint makes various contributions (righteous
acts) to the bride’s wedding garment, and some may or may not make any at all.”30But this gives a
picture that leads to the logical conclusion that the bride will be half-naked!31 “Bikini Believers at the
Bema” might be possible, as Radmacher’s sermon title suggests but not a Bikini Bride!32 So I reject
the Illustration 41. Conservative Bride of Christ as a half-naked impossibility. I propose that
Ventilato is mistaken in his organic limitation and that there are two bodies actually in view. This
allows me to also exegete Eph 5 in a consistent manner. See Illustration 42. Two Bodies in One. My
arguments do include topology (see Illustration 43. Topological Bodies), but I also defend this view
exegetically so that the Biblical Bride is fully and beautifully clothed, as Revelation demands. See
Illustration 44. Biblical Bride.
          Therefore, in locating my position on the hermeneutical grid, I have identified myself as a
moderate misthologist (Illustration 45. What is a Moderate Misthologist?) calling myself a
Marrowist rather than a Calvinist or Arminian on the soteriological horizontal axis, and advocating
bridal misthology on the vertical axis. See Illustration 46. Bridal Misthology.
8)      Rosscup objects that all believers will persevere/overcome
        a) Perseverance versus eternal security
         Rosscup has written an article that gets cited with some frequency opposing our point of
view. In it he argues that all believers are overcomers and persevere.33 Of course, this is common
claim in Calvinistic circles, and it meets counter claims from the Arminian camp. I find it
soteriologically and misthologically necessary to distinguish myself from both camps.

             i) Acrostics

                 (1) Calvinistic TULIP
                                              Total Depravity
                                              Unconditional Election
                                              Limited Atonement
                                              Irresistible Grace
                                              Perseverance of the Saints

        In his debate with Hunt, White frequently complains that Hunt has not provided a
comprehensive system and response. I give the comprehensive response requested and even deal with
his argument for irresistible grace. See Illustration 47. Jn 6:44 Sentence Diagram.

                 (2) Arminian PEARS
                                              Prevenient Grace
                                              Election on Condition

                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
                                               Atonement for All
                                               Resistible Grace
                                               Salvation through Perseverance

                   (3) Marrowistic GRAPE
                                               Gift is Free
                                               Rewards are Earned
                                               Absolute Assurance:
                                               Passive Persuasion
                                               Eternal Security

       Assurance has been called our opponents’ Achilles heel. I press the attack at this point with
numerous illustrations:
       Illustration 48. Soteriological Performance Based Assurance
       Illustration 49. LS Wrecks Absolute Assurance
       Illustration 50. Faith in Christ Takes Care of Doubt.
       Illustration 51. Howl of the Wolf

         You will note that my FG acrostic pits eternal security against perseverance as the last item in
the acrostic. This arrangement is not accidental. Arminians and Calvinists attempt to stand shoulder to
shoulder in pointing their fingers at GES as being an extremist position since it does not condition
security on perseverance.34 Painting us as an extreme, however, is logically impossible when you
actually look at the direction they point their fingers in the OSAS illustration. See Illustration 52.
OSAS—Whose is It? Clearly, GES is the mediating position.

              ii) Perseverance in Pisteuo2

                 (1) Substantival participles for present tense
        In contrast to our camp, the Arminians and Calvinists teach that you must persevere in faith in
order to reach heaven. I spend a considerable amount of time refuting this position exegetically,
theologically, and aspectually. I counter Shank’s aspectual arguments and Wallace’s substantival
assumptions on Jn 3:16.

                   (2) Punctiliar appropriation for metaphors
        But my defense is not limited to substantival participles in that I deal with every tense of
pisteuo in John. Not only do I interact with all verbal aspects of pisteuo itself, I evaluate the
metaphors as well. See Illustration 53. Metaphors For Believe. Between the two appendices, there
are a hundred pages of material dealing with the abused present tense as opposed to the abused aorist
and defending punctiliar soteriological appropriation.

                  (3) Ontological immutability
         Aspectual defenses of eternal security have been attempted before, so this is nothing new.
Arminians have also countered that if you stop believing you could no longer be classified as a
believer. Securitists have responded with substantival classifications that project the classification
long after the action of the verb has been complete. I include those arguments as well, but I also add a
number of new ones. For example, my appendix on Johannine anamartetology concurs with Hodges
that 1Jn 3:9 demonstrates ontological immutability. The Bible presents at least seven types of

        2
            Subsequent note: this material has been removed from The Outer Darkness and made a separate
book.
                               For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                  Misthologist@misthology.org
sinlessness. This particular text is the centerpiece for ontological sinlessness. See Illustration 54.
Three Parallel Cycles. Our regenerate trichotomist spirit (tri-spirit) cannot sin.35 Therefore, it cannot
cease to believe. But in discussing trichotomy, I am not insensitive to the semantic overlap between
spirit and soul. See Illustration 55. Location of Pri-Spirit.
         I use Illustration 56. Intermediate Trichotomous Model to illustrate that Christ may be outside
the heart of the believer but cannot be separated from the believer’s spirit. I would also suggest that a
passage such as Rom 8:16 also indicates that ontological apostasy is impossible. Our trichotomous
spirit cannot cease to believe. We can commit soulical apostasy and thereby forfeit the salvation of our
souls in the outer darkness, but the salvation of our spirit is assured. There is also a chapter on how we
can escape the outer darkness by living victorious lives that uses this type of illustration in more
detail. See Illustration 57. Advanced Trichotomous Model. Of course, Illustration 58. The Trinity is
one model I’ll use for trichotomy.

              iii) Perseverance in Works/Fruit
         My chapter devoted to the parable of the vineyard interacts with criticisms by the tragic trio
(Pagenkemper, Keathley IV, and Blomberg). It will deal with the claim that all believers work
and get the same basic reward regardless of the work they do. The common mistaken mentality is
that all believers will persevere to the end and get the same reward in the end. My counter will
entail agreement with Ryrie’s theory of relativity. See Illustration 59. Relativity Chart. And it
combines that with a modified adaptation of Niemelä’s diagrams. See Illustration 60. Misthological
Range of Fruitfulness.

             iv) Apostasy
         In pointing out the real danger of apostasy, I prefer Kendall’s approach in which
misthological apostasy may be irremediable and use this explanation for 2Pet 2:17-22. See
Illustration 61.Falling from Path of Righteousness. Not all Arminians regard all forms of apostasy
as remediable. We can explain such passages similarly but from a misthological vantage point.

        b) Overcomer
         Another popular argument in favor of perseverance that must be overcomed is the Calvinistic
view of the overcomer. It is insisted that all believers are overcomers in Rev 2-3, and this is
supposedly proven by difficulties in explaining away the warning about the Book of Life in Rev 3:5 or
the partial rapture in Rev 2:11.

             i) Book of life (Rev 3:5)

                  (1) Omniscience
         The complexity in addressing arguments pertaining to the Book of Life is increased by the
debate between the Classic View (CV) and Open View (OV) of God’s knowledge. Does God know
everything that we as free creatures will do? If so, how can we be free to do otherwise? I interact with
certain models of the classic view (such as the eternal now) and find them wanting. See Illustration
62. Timeless View of God. I pose a counter model that is very similar to Padgett’s view.36 See
Illustration 63. Elastically Temporal.

                  (2) Formal litotes
         I do not find any insurmountable problem in opting for Hodges’ litotetic interpretation of Rev
3:5. See Illustration 64. Not Erased = Litotes.




                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
             ii) Partial Rapture (Rev 3:10)

                  (1) Niemelä’s punctuation
         In his review of Wong’s article, Wilkin counters with an article by Niemelä in which an
alternative punctuation of the text is suggested.37 Accordingly, a translation such as the following
might be preferred.
                 9
                  Behold, I will cause those of the synagogue of Satan, who say that
        they are Jews, and are not, but lie—I will make them to come and bow down
        at your feet, and to know that I have loved you, 10 because you have kept the
        word of My perseverance. I also will keep you from the hour of testing that
        is about to come upon the whole world, to test those who dwell upon the
        earth. (Rev 3:9-10; TM)

I acknowledge that Niemelä’s presentation refutes the grammatical basis for considering this promise
a reward. On the other hand, I do not believe that the contextual basis has been nullified and therefore
conclude that Rev 2:11 is an informal litotes.

             iii) Faust objects to Litotes (Rev 2:11)
         As a Gehenna misthologist, Faust objects to Hodges’ litotes position and argues that carnal
believers can indeed be hurt by the second death. But as for my part, I am content that my chapter in
Hodges’ defense of litotetic material demonstrates that Hodges is not guilty of special pleading. In a
chapter devoted to litotes, I have charted all Johannine litotes. See Illustration 65. Johannine Litotes.
9)      Keathley IV objects that the tears of all believers are wiped away
         In Keathley’s rejection of the misthological interpretation of the outer darkness, he likewise
appeals to this common sentiment that everyone’s tears are wiped away:

                Another question is the meaning of the banquet imagery. Banquet
        imagery almost always refers to the kingdom / heaven (cf. Isa 62:4-5, Jer
        2:2, 31:2, Eze 16:32 and Hos 2:2, Isa 25:6; 65:8-16 and Ps 22:26-29).
        Especially compare Isaiah 25:6-9 where it talks about God preparing a lavish
        banquet for all peoples and “wiping tears away from all faces.”…
                …Moreover, they contradict the very nature of the joy we are to
        experience in heaven. In fact, how do we reconcile the fact that God will
        “wipe away every tear” (Rev 21:4; Isa 25:6) with the idea that there will be
        “weeping and gnashing of teeth” in heaven.38

         Neither Huber nor Sapaugh have reconciled the misthological interpretation with the
background passage in Is 25:6 which says that the feast will be for all people, not just faithful
believers. Chitwood correctly perceived concerning the earlier occasion in Revelation that “the
reference to all tears being wiped away prior to the millennium in Rev. 7:17 is only for a select group
of individuals realizing an inheritance in the kingdom.”39 But this still leaves Rev 21:4 unexplained.
The solution is simple. It is a litotes promised only to bridal overcomers. See Illustration 66. When
are the Tears Wiped Away?
10)     Lordship Salvationists object that there is no such thing as a carnal
        Christian
        Lordship Salvation claims that there is no such thing as a carnal Christian. Obviously, if I am
claiming in contrast that carnal Christians are thrown into the outer darkness, then I will have to
provide sufficient evidence for that conclusion. See Illustration 67. Lost or Saved and Illustration 68.
Sheep or Goat. But my principle argument in this connection is in an appendix dedicated to this topic


                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
in the Corinthian epistles, in which I conclude that those who need reconciliation in 2Cor 5:20 are
carnal believers.
11)       Bigalke: Mt. Olivet Discourse is sheep versus goats
         Bigalke follows Ice’s lead in breaking up the discussion of the potential time frames for the
fulfillment of the Olivet Discourse around the four logical possibilities.40 He correctly advocates
futurism, but he unfortunately limits the judgment to that of the sheep and goats and favors a
soteriological understanding of the outer darkness. Therefore, I would consider him a FG soteriologist,
not a FG misthologist. As seen in Illustration 69.Four Possible Relationships to Time, I hold that the
bema is also in view in the Olivet discourse. This necessarily leads to a misthological view of the
outer darkness that is demanded by the exegetical details. See Illustration 70. The Unworthy Slave.
      1
         Michael G. Huber, “The Concept of the ‘Outer Darkness’ in the Gospel of Matthew” (Th.M.
thesis, Dallas Theological Seminary, 1978). Michael G. Huber, “The ‘Outer Darkness’ in Matthew
and Its Relationship to Grace,” Journal of the Grace Evangelical Society 5:2 (1992): 11-25.Gregory
P. Sapaugh, “An Interpretation of Matthew 22:1-14” (Th.M. thesis, Dallas Theological Seminary,
1991). Gregory P. Sapaugh, “A Call to the Wedding Celebration: An Exposition of Matthew 22:1-14,”
Journal of the Grace Evangelical Society 5:1 (Spring 1992): 11-34.
      2
        James M. Ventilato, “A Scriptural Refutation of The Teachings of Zane Hodges, Joseph Dillow
and the Grace Evangelical Society, with Respect to the Future Inheritance, Glory, and Destiny of the
Church—Christ’s        Beloved      Body    &     Bride,”    section   III,   23.    Available    at
http://www.middletownbiblechurch.org/doctrine/hodgesjv.htm. Accessed on 12 August, 2004.
      3
            Vic     Reasoner,      “Golden     Chain     or    Iron    Padlock?”    Available     at
http://www.fwponline.cc/v20n1reasoner.html.
      4
        Michael S. Horton, Norman L. Geisler, Stephen M. Ashby, and J. Steven Harper, Four Views
on Eternal Security, ed. Matthew J. Pinson (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2002), 68,76, 86, 109.
      5
        Ibid, 110.
      6
         Gordon C. Olson, Beyond Calvinism and Arminianism: An Inductive Mediate Theology of
Salvation (Global Gospel Publishers, 2002), 320, 344.
      7
        Ibid, 302.
      8
        Ibid, 316.
      9
        Ibid, 344-345.
      10
         Ibid, 318.
      11
         Ibid, 233.
      12
          Michael Eaton, No Condemnation: A New Theology of Assurance (Downers Grove:
InterVarsity Press, 1995), 249, n. 9
      13
         René A. Lopez, Romans Unlocked: Power to Deliver (Springfield: 21st Century Press, 2005),
182.
      14
         Thomas R. Edgar, “The Meaning of PROGINWSKW (“Foreknowledge”),” CTSJ 44 (Spring
2003): 49.
      15
         Robert E. Picirilli, “Foreknowledge, Freedom, and the Future,” JETS 43:2 (June 2000): 259-
271.
      16
         George Bryson, The Dark Side of Calvinism: The Calvinist Caste System (Santa Ana, CA:
Calvary Chapel Publishing, 2004): 212-214.
      17
         Zane C. Hodges, “The Rapture in 1 Thessalonians 5:1-11,” Walvoord: A Tribute, ed. Donald
K. Campbell (Chicago: Moody Press, 1982). Thomas R. Edgar, “Lethargic or Dead in 1 Thessalonians
5:10?” CTSJ 6:4 (October 2000): 36-51.
      18
         William E. Brown, “The New Testament Concept of the Believer’s Inheritance” (Th.D. diss.,
Dallas Theological Seminary, 1984).
      19
         George Zeller, “The Theology of Zane Hodges and Joseph Dillow and the Grace Evangelical
Society.” Available at http://www.middletownbiblechurch.org/doctrine/theology.htm. Accessed on 13
August, 2004.


                             For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                              Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                Misthologist@misthology.org
     20
          René A. Lopez, “Do [Sic] The Vice List In 1 Corinthians 6:9-10 Describe Believers or
Unbelievers?” Grace Evangelical Society Conference CD, 2005
      21
         Zane C. Hodges, The Epistle of James: Proven Character through Testing, eds. Arthur L.
Farstad and Robert N. Wilkin (Irving: Grace Evangelical Society, 1994), 51.
      22
         Lopez, Romans, 93, 97-98.
      23
          Joseph C. Dillow, The Reign of the Servant Kings: A Study of Eternal Security and the Final
Significance of Man. 2nd ed. (Hayesville, NC: Schoettle Publishing Co., 1993), 184-186. Lopez,
Romans,137.
      24
           Michael Eaton, No Condemnation: A New Theology of Assurance (Downers Grove:
InterVarsity Press, 1995), 176-183.
      25
          Keathley IV, Hampton. “The ‘Outer Darkness’: Heaven’s Suburb or Hell?” Available at
http://bible.org/page.asp?page_id
=1044. Accessed on 17 September, 2004.
      26
         Gary T. Whipple, The Matthew Mysteries: A Revelation of the Higher Wisdom Concerning the
Church, Israel and the Gentiles in Prophecy (Hayesville: Schoettle Publishing Co., 1995), 117.
      27
          J.D. Faust, The Rod: Will God Spare It? An Exhaustive Study of Temporary Punishment for
Unfaithful Christians at the Judgment Seat and During the Millennial Kingdom (Hayesville: Schoettle
Publishing Co., 2002).
      28
          Joseph Dillow, “Discipleship in the Sermon on the Mount: A Review of Some Problem
Passages.” GES Conference CD, 2003.
      29
         Ventilato, “Refutation,” section I, 10.
      30
         Dillow, 203.
      31
          “Bikini Believers at the Bema” is certainly possible, as Radmacher’s sermon title suggests
(“Bema,” 41). But a bikini bride is not possible.
      32
         Ibid., 41.
      33
         James E. Rosscup, “The Overcomer of the Apocalypse,” GTJ 3:2 (Fall 1982): 261-286.
      34
         Horton, Security.
      35
          The tri-spirit is semantically distinct from the pri-spirit. The latter refers to the phenomenal
overlapping of the tri-soul and tri-spirit.
      36
         Paul Helm, Alan G. Padgett, William Lane Craig, and Nicholas Wolterstorff. Four Views: God
& Time, ed. Gregory E. Ganssle (Downers Grove: InterVarsity Press, 2001).
      37
          Robert N. Wilkin, JOTGES, 23:107. See John Niemelä, “For you have kept My Word: The
Grammar of Revelation 3:10,” CTSJ 6:1 (January - March 2000): 1-25.
      38
         Keathley IV, “Darkness,” 8-9.
      39
         Chitwood, Olivet, 291.
      40
          Timmy Ice, “The Destructive View of Preterism,” CTS 3:10 (December 1999): 386-400. Ron
J. Bigalke, Jr., “The Olivet Discourse: A Resolution of Time,” CTSJ 9 (Spring 2003): 106-140.




                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
