A Tribute to Grace




              By
        Marty A. Cauley




       © Copyright 2017
       All rights reserved

       Misthological Press
   1231 Monteith Branch Road
        Sylva, NC 28779
      All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
reproduced in any form without the prior written
permission of the author, except as provided by USA
copyright law.

      For the author’s online articles and for updates
concerning       his     coming       releases,    see
www.UnconditionalSecurity.org. The author’s email
address is: Misthologist@misthology.org.

       “Unless otherwise noted, all Scripture quotations
are taken from the New American Standard Bible®.
Copyright © 1960, 1962, 1963, 1968, 1971, 1972, 1973,
1975, 1977, 1995 by The Lockman Foundation
Used by permission.” (www.Lockman.org)

Unless otherwise noted, the 1977 edition of the New
American Standard Bible is the edition used in the present
book and abbreviated as the NAS.

      All emphases in quoted material are added unless
otherwise noted.
                  Books by the Author

1. The Race of Grace—introductory book in which
   performance-related themes (such as perseverance)
   are considered essential for rewards in heaven.
   Entrance into heaven, in contrast, is regarded as free.
   A strong defense of unconditional security derived
   from believers being given to Jesus is a particular
   strength of this book.
2. Breaking the Rocking Horse—introductory book
   regarding the distinction between having eternal life
   as a gift versus obtaining it as a reward. An overview
   of the outer darkness and an exegetical treatment of
   the parable of the soils are this book’s primary
   strengths.
3. Woolly Wolves and Woolless Sheep—a rejection of
   the notion that profession of salvation is proven
   genuine by the way a person lives. This book focuses
   on the parable of the sheep and the goats and shows
   the inadequacy of conditional security in interpreting
   this parable.
4. Mere Christianity and Moral Christianity—a more
   comprehensive discussion regarding perseverance
   (and other performance-related themes) as being
   needed for rewards in Heaven rather than for entrance
   into Heaven. This book provides both introductory
   material and advanced treatments.
5. Sealed and Secure—a thorough defense of a popular
   argument for unconditional security that also defends
   the premise of unconditional promises.
6. Fallen from Grace but Not from Perfection—an
   advanced defense of unconditional security which
   affirms that believers can fall from grace but not fall
   from perfection.
7. Carnal Corinth—an affirmation of the categorical
    existence of carnal Christians within the Corinthian
    epistles.
8. Trichotomy—an advanced holistic dichotomous
    discussion of trichotomy with an integration of
    nikology.
9. The Outer Darkness—a magnum opus that ties
    together the author’s arguments for unconditional
    security and conditional rewards.
10. John in Living Color—a color-coded translation and
    reference manual of the Gospel of John that focuses on
    the grammatical and aspectual indications of
    unconditional security.
11. New Birth by the Sovereign Wind—refutes the
    Calvinistic interpretation of Jn 3:16 that limits God’s
    love to the elect. An excursus deals with the Calvinistic
    claim from Jn 3:3 that one must be born again before
    one can see (i.e., believe) the gospel. An additional
    excursus entertains a possible duality to what it means
    to see the kingdom.
12. Rewards are Eternal—is a defense of the eternal nature
    of biblical rewards against the proposition that Rev 22:5
    indicates that all believers will rule in the eternal state
    and against the premise that Rev 21:4 proves that
    misthological death will no longer exist in the eternal
    state.


                For books by the author, see
            http://misthology.org/?page_id=35.

               For additional material, see
             www.UnconditionalSecurity.org.
                    Table of Contents
TABLE OF CONTENTS ................................................... VI
TABLE OF ILLUSTRATIONS ........................................ VII
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ............................................... VIII
THE REQUEST ..................................................................... 1
THE DOWNLOAD................................................................ 3
THE BACKGROUND ........................................................... 5
THE TRANSITION ............................................................. 19
THE STOOL ........................................................................ 23
THE CONCERN .................................................................. 30
THE REWARD .................................................................... 33
THE ANTINOMIANS ......................................................... 37
CONCLUSION .................................................................... 39
EXCURSUS ON ETERNAL LIFE .................................... 41
EXCURSUS ON FORGIVENESS ..................................... 45
EXCURSUS ON PAUL’S DIVISIONS .............................. 49
INDEXES.............................................................................. 53
 GREEK INDEX ........................................................................ 53
 AUTHOR INDEX ..................................................................... 53
 SUBJECT INDEX ..................................................................... 53
 SCRIPTURE INDEX.................................................................. 54
                Table of Illustrations
Illustration 1. Why should God let you into Heaven?............ 14
Illustration 2. Full-Fledged LS Performatist .......................... 23
Illustration 3. Frontend LS Performatist ................................ 26
Illustration 4. Backend LS Performatist ................................ 27
Illustration 5. Zero LS Performatist ....................................... 29
Illustration 6. Run the Race ................................................... 29
Illustration 7. LS Pastor ......................................................... 32
Illustration 8. Test Case Question .......................................... 33
Illustration 9. Multidimensionality of Eternal Life ................ 41
Illustration 10. Sins Remembered in Pauline Corpus ............ 47
Illustration 11. Potential Sequence of Stages......................... 49
             Acknowledgments
        This book is written in honor of my father, Al Cauley,
the man who taught me to love the Lord and love Scripture
by both his preaching and example. To mother, Gladys J.
Cauley, I would like to express thanks for proofreading this
book. I would like to express thanks also to my wife, Dianne
Cauley, and my brother, Philip Cauley, for having assisted
in this capacity as well.
                 The Request
       On Saturday, March 25, 2017, my father asked me
to speak at his funeral. He is a retired Southern Baptist
pastor living in Cullowhee, NC. My wife, Dianne, and I
live nearby in Sylva. We had been visiting with Dad and
Mom at their house. I suppose he had funerals on his mind
because he and Mom recently had attended a funeral in
Brevard, and he was telling Dianne and me about it.
       A member of a church that Dad had pastored years
before in Brevard had died, and Dad and Mom had
returned to Brevard for the funeral. Dad was telling us
about the former members that they had met while at the
funeral. Dianne and I had attended that church, so we
were familiar with the previous members of whom he was
speaking.
       He was fondly recalling those previous members
who came up at the funeral and told him how appreciative
they were of his focus on grace during his time as their
pastor. Grace is his favorite topic and mine. So we
reminisced about the impact the biblical message of grace
had had on our lives and our disappointment that so many
pastors who think they understand grace clearly do not.
       Dad recalled his earlier years pastoring at White
Lake. Like so many other pastors, during those years he
did not understand grace either. He was doing his best to
be the best pastor he could and leading the area in
evangelism. He was really performing hard back in those
days—and that was the problem. He was a performatist.*

*
  Performatist refers to someone who believes that good
performance on the believer’s part is necessary for
entrance into Heaven. Dad was a soft performatist who
only added an initial promise to perform better (rather
than actual follow through) as necessary to be a believer.
Page 2                                        A Tribute to Grace
Carnality can manifest itself in various ways among
Christians. For some Christians, carnality is succumbing
to fleshly indulgence. For others, it can be seen in
lukewarm performance. For my Dad, however, his
carnality in those days was a result of full-hearted
performance, doing the best he could to be the best pastor
and Christian he could be. Unbeknown to many pastors,
such performance is a sign of carnality if you are failing
to rely upon the power of the Holy Spirit, or if you are
relying upon the Holy Spirit but also relying on your
Spirit-enabled performance in any degree, shape, or form
to get you into Heaven.*
       Dad made a partial break with that type of
performatistic mentality later. By the time he
subsequently pastored a church in Morganton, he was
relying on the Holy Spirit to enable him to live the
Christian life. But it was not until he reached his final
pastorate in Brevard, at the church where he retired as a
minister, that he finally made a clean break with the
performatistic mentality that has plagued so many
pastors—a legalistic form of carnality.† Not until his
pastorate in Brevard did he fully embrace grace.

*
   Carnal is derived from the NT word for fleshly and is
contrasted to being spiritual (1Cor 3:1-3). A spiritual Christian
relies on the Holy Spirit to live the Christian life in a manner
consistent with the truths revealed by the Spirit in the
Scriptures. A carnal Christian relies on self to live his or her
life, thus living a self-sufficient and self-centered life, even if
seeking God’s help to live the Christian life.
†
  Legalism teaches that keeping the law is necessary for
salvation from Hell. Whether this law is in the form of OT
or NT commands makes no difference. Advocates may
not even acknowledge that they are teaching that keeping
the law is necessary. Still, their conditioning entrance into
Heaven on performance unmasks their essential error.
A Tribute to Dad                                       Page 3
        At the conclusion of our visit with Dad, he said that
if he died before the Lord returned, he wanted me to speak
at his funeral. I responded that tearing up might make it
difficult, but I acknowledged that having his children
speak at the funeral would be better than having a
legalistic pastor speak. All his children have embraced
grace, so he wanted his children to be the ones to speak at
the funeral. Accordingly, I consented.

                   The Download
        That night I awoke around 3:30 AM and could not
go back to sleep. The thoughts of what I would need to
say at Dad’s funeral kept running through my mind. It was
like having a sermonic download from the Lord, and I
could not get it out of my mind. There was only one thing
to do: Get out of bed at about 5:00 AM and at least jot
down enough of what was running through my mind to
get it out of my head and onto paper.
        Ironically, this was not the first time I had had such
an experience. My first time had happened many years
before, when I was in high school. I never had preached
before, but the Lord awoke me in the middle of the night
with a burning sermon on my heart. The only way I could
get peace that night was to get out of bed and go to the
kitchen at the end of the house away from the bedrooms
and write out that sermon. I had no intention of doing
anything with it. Still, I knew that I at least had to be
willing to do something with it if the Lord wanted. So I
told the Lord that if He wanted me to preach this sermon,
then He would have to have Dad ask me to preach, which
was a pretty safe stipulation since Dad had never asked
me to speak before. Of course, I was not going to breathe

Hyper-legalism adds insult to injury by additionally
teaching that keeping the OT law is necessary for NT
sanctification.
Page 4                                   A Tribute to Grace
a word about it to him, or anyone else, for that matter. I
returned to bed and tucked away the sermon.
        The next day, while Dad, Mom, and I were in the
kitchen, he told me that he was going to be out of town
that coming weekend and asked if I would like to speak. I
was standing next to the frig and slumped against it in
shock. They did not know about the sermon that I had
written that night or what I had told the Lord about being
willing to speak if asked. I explained what had happened
and thus consented to preach. Because of my promise to
the Lord, I had no choice. As it turned out, Dad then made
arrangements to stay in town so that he could be there for
the sermon. Nevertheless, even though he stayed, I had
been asked to speak, and I had promised the Lord that I
would speak if asked. So I did so. A great movement of
the Spirit was present during the sermon, and many
responded to the invitation. This was at the church in
Morganton. He pastored that church during my high
school years.
        Now, many years later, however, when I woke
during the middle of the night and had this sermonic
download from the Lord, I knew I could not write out that
much material during the night. So I just jotted down
enough to let we wait until the next day to start writing it
down in detail. To suffice for that night, I drew a picture
of an illustration that the Lord had laid on my mind during
the night which would summarize the gist of the material.
        The next day was Sunday. Dianne and I drove 50
minutes to the church we attend in Asheville. Years
before, I had given up on finding a church where we live
in Sylva that truly preached grace, which is why we were
driving that distance to go to church. Dianne was driving
because she does not like my driving. Go figure. During
the trip and during the sermon, I was thinking about the
material I would have to write. At first I thought that I
would just write an article and post it online. However,
A Tribute to Dad                                     Page 5
before I could get started on doing so that evening, I
decided that writing a booklet would be better. This way
I could put a picture on the cover to summarize Free
Grace (FG) teaching and make the booklet available at
the funeral—should it come to that. To get the material
out of my head, I would have to put it on paper.
       So here I am typing, much like I did in high school,
when I had to write out that sermon. This time, though, I
was asked to speak in advance. How and when this FG
material will be presented, I leave in the Lord’s hands. My
goal is to be brief, basically just telling enough to get it
out of my head, while doing justice to the request to speak.
As a result, I am writing out what I would say at his
funeral in advance, with enough detail that I could
summarize at his funeral and make this FG booklet
available for those who want the details. We’ll see what
happens.

              The Background
       I mentioned that my Dad did not make a clean
break with performance-based carnality until his last
pastorate in Brevard, where he finally embraced FG
theology. But some background information will be
necessary to understand the nature and cause of that break
and what that means.
       When I went to seminary, I attended the same
Southern Baptist seminary my Dad had attended many
years before. He was now pastoring in Brevard. After
graduating from seminary, I pastored a church in Virginia.
Then the opportunity became available for me to pastor
the same church he had pastored earlier in Morganton, the
same church I attended during my high school years—the
same church where I had preached my first sermon, which
I wrote in the middle of the night many years before. So
there I was, years later, pastoring this same church, and it
was a happy time—initially.
Page 6                                    A Tribute to Grace
        Something profound had changed, however,
between the first sermon that I had preached in that church
when I was in high school and years later when they called
me as their pastor. The difference was that I had found
something that I had been chasing for years—grace.
        When I was a high school kid at this same church,
I was a performatist, like my Dad had been when he was
the pastor there. I was doing my best to live the Christian
life, memorize Scripture, and witness. I would witness at
school, on the football team, at work, and within the
church evangelism team. Even when I came home feeling
worn out from football practice, I still would go
witnessing with the church evangelism team. Plus, I
assisted with the bus ministry, which involved extra
visiting.
        As part of my evangelism, I was trained in how to
use the Four Spiritual Laws, a gospel tract for the lost.
The same organization, Campus Crusade for Christ, also
had a blue Spirit-Filled Life tract that we used for
witnessing to carnal Christians—of the fleshly variety.
Little did I realize at the time that using this gospel
material resulted in my being a carnal Christian myself—
of the legalistic variety.
        This gospel tract conditions your salvation, to a
degree, upon your performance in two aspects. To be sure,
it instructed you to believe in Jesus for the gift of eternal
life. Yet, at the same time, according to the Four Spiritual
Laws, this so-called gift came with strings attached. In
addition to believing in Jesus for eternal life, you were
told, not in so many words of course, that this free gift of
eternal life was also conditioned on your behaving. You
had to make two performance-based promises to get this
allegedly free gift of eternal life.
        First, you had to repent (and thus turn from your
sins), which naturally entails an implicit promise to
behave better. Second, you had to give control of your life
A Tribute to Dad                                      Page 7
to Christ (and thus commit your life to the Lordship of
Christ in terms of your performance), which likewise
entails an implicit promise to perform better.
        The tract was fundamentally flawed in these two
areas (not to mention other areas as well). In those days,
my Dad preached the same requirements for the gift of
eternal life in his sermons: repent and commit.
Consequently, I could not be sure that I had qualified for
this reputed free gift because I could not be sure that I had
turned 180% from sin or committed 100%. What if I had
not turned enough or was not committed enough? My
salvation from Hell and my assurance of that salvation
was conditioned, in part, upon my performance. In short,
I was a performatist.
        The more popular term for this theological
persuasion is Lordship Salvation (LS). I was a Lordship
Salvationist.* I was not trusting exclusively in the Lord
Jesus for eternal life. By logical necessity, I also had to
trust in my submission to the Lordship of Christ in terms
of my performance for eternal life.
        The most glaring contradiction, of course, was that
this LS gospel made a mockery of the freeness of the gift.
The Bible teaches that we can have salvation from Hell as
a free gift simply by believing in Jesus for the free gift of
eternal life. The second contradiction was that the Four
Spiritual Laws tract conditions your salvation from Hell
on performance, but the Spirit-Filled Life booklet frankly
acknowledges that many believers are not performing as
they should even though they are saved from Hell. This
latter tract correctly acknowledges that these poorly
performing Christians have Christ in their lives and thus
*
  Lordship Salvationist is a term popularly used to
describe someone who maintains that some form or
degree of surrender to Christ as Lord of one’s life (and
thus performance) is biblically necessary for salvation
from eternal damnation.
Page 8                                   A Tribute to Grace
are saved from Hell, but these carnal Christians do not
submit the throne of their lives to the Lordship of Christ.
       The bottom line was the carnal Christians are
affirmed as being saved even though they do not submit
the control of their lives to Christ. Nevertheless, these
tracts conditioned the initial reception of eternal life on
submitting control to the Lord.
       As a result, during my high school years, I could
not be completely sure of my salvation. The Spirit-Filled
Life tract would allow the possibility that poorly
performing Christians were saved, but the Four Spiritual
Laws tract gave solid grounds for questioning the
salvation of poorly performing Christians in that it
conditioned salvation on repentance and commitment.
And try as hard as I might, my repentance and
commitment fell short, at times, of being everything it was
supposed to be.
       This was my state of affairs under my Dad’s
preaching at Morganton. Thankfully, his teaching was not
nearly as bad as it often is in LS churches. Many
performatists preach that if you perform badly you can
lose your salvation. They might be called forfeitists.* This
form of performatism teaches that you forfeit the free gift
of eternal life if you perform too badly. Forfeitism is
common in the Church of Christ, for example. My Dad
knew, however, that NOSAS (not saved always saved)
was wrong. He preached eternal security instead: OSAS
(once saved always saved), which is rather typical for
many Southern Baptists. And, like him, I staunchly
believed in eternal security. Even during those years when
I was struggling with assurance, I believed, for the most
part (i.e., most of the time), that I was eternally secure.
Granted, this was not a logically consistent perspective,
*
  Forfeitists refers to advocates of conditional security
who believe that those believers who do not persevere
forfeit (i.e., lose) the gift of eternal life.
A Tribute to Dad                                     Page 9
but, then again, my theology was not logically or
biblically consistent at the time.
       Equally bad, though, another form of performative
theology is frequently found in Southern Baptist
churches. We could call it proveitism. Really, it is even
worse than forfeitistic NOSAS since provetists teach that
the way you live proves whether you are saved. Not only
do you have to repent and commit on the frontend, but
you have to follow through well enough on the backend
to have reason to believe that you were saved in the first
place. Proveitists believe that the way you live proves
whether you are saved from Hell.* In terms of assurance
at least, proveitists tend to have the least degree of
assurance. For they believe that if their performance is too
bad for too long, this will prove that they were never
really saved at all. Thankfully, my Dad also knew
proveitism was wrong. He firmly believed that carnal
Christians were genuinely saved, just as the Spirit-Filled
Life tract correctly taught. I firmly believed it as well.
       Looking back, I can attribute two very positive
things to my Dad’s preaching in that respect, even at that
time. He taught me to believe in eternal security and to
believe that it even applies to carnal believers. The
negative aspect was that he was teaching a logically
contradictory message as to how to receive eternal
security initially, and this logical inconsistency was
robbing me of my assurance, at least at times, despite my
best behavior.
       Such was the state of things when I went to college
at Western Carolina University. During my first year, I
attended two Bible studies. One was a Church of Christ
study. They taught NOSAS. At the first study, they read
*
  Proveitists believe that fruit in the form of perseverance
is necessary proof of salvation: If you do not have this
fruit, then you never were saved initially. Perseverance is
necessary to prove that you are saved and to enter Heaven.
Page 10                                   A Tribute to Grace
Jn 3:16: “For God so loved the world, that He gave His
only begotten Son, that whoever believes in Him should
not perish, but have eternal life.” And the leader asked
everyone what they thought the verse meant. He went
around the circle, having everyone give their answer. I
was last. Being securitist—a firm advocate of eternal
security (OSAS)—I responded that I understood the verse
as teaching that I was going to Heaven whether I liked it
or not, that I could not go to Hell even if I wanted to do
so because I had trusted in Christ for eternal life and
therefore eternally had such life.* This answer was
equivalent to throwing a theological hand grenade into the
center of the room. The explosion was immediate. My
logic was straightforward. I had believed in Jesus and thus
had eternal life and would not perish in Hell. For me,
Jn 3:16 could just as well be translated, “For God so loved
the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that
whoever believes in Him would not perish, but have
eternal life.” They spent the rest of the year trying to
convince me that I was wrong. As forfeitists, they
believed that the gift of eternal life could be forfeited. In
their estimation, you should have eternal life, but you
could lose it if you did not perform well enough.†
       The other Bible study I attended while in college
was something new, a Free Grace Bible study. Like me,
those teaching this FG study were firm believers in


*
   Securitists believe in unconditional security—that is,
once a person believes in Christ for eternal life, that
person is unconditionally secure in Christ and is
unconditionally      assured   of    reaching    Heaven
unconditionally.
†
  I have written numerous books defending unconditional
security. See www.unconditonalsecurity.org, and for my
books, see http://misthology.org/?page_id=35.
A Tribute to Dad                                       Page 11
unconditional security, but unlike me they were logically
and biblically consistent.
        Whereas I was a Lordship Salvationist, they were
Free Grace Salvationists.* Thus, unlike myself, they did
not condition the free gift of eternal life on performance
at all. Because of my LS background, I was inconsistent
in conditioning the reception of eternal life, in part, on
performance—the promise to perform better via requiring
a resolve to turn from sin and a commitment to the
Lordship of Christ over my performance as necessary to
reach Heaven.
        This FG Bible study, likewise, taught that
repentance and commitment are very important. But the
FG position was that any such performance issues are
important for rewards in Heaven, not for entrance into
Heaven.
        I attended this FG Bible study throughout my four
years in college. A year after graduation, Dianne and I
married. I was the youth minister at the church where she
and I married in Sylva. A year later, I went to seminary—
the same Southern Baptist seminary my Dad had
attended. However, it was not until my first year in
seminary that I made a complete break with Lordship
Salvation and gave up on conditioning entrance into
Heaven on any degree or type of performance.
        The crisis moment came during my first year in
seminary when I was asked to teach the Sunday School
class and the subject was repentance. They were using
*
   Free Grace Salvationists insist that the biblical
requirement for salvation from eternal damnation is that
one simply believes in the Lord Jesus for eternal life. This
understanding is exemplified by the Grace Evangelical
Society (GES) motto: Faith Alone in Christ Alone. From
their perspective, saving grace is conditioned on the
recognition that the free gift of eternal life is offered freely
to those who simply believe in Jesus Christ for eternal life.
Page 12                                   A Tribute to Grace
Southern Baptist Sunday School curriculum, and I was
attending a church where a friend of my Dad’s was the
pastor. The problem was, how could I teach that the free
gift of eternal life was conditioned on repentance, and
thus performance?
       I called Stan Ponz. He was one of the leaders of the
Free Grace Bible study that I had attended in college. By
the way, he had been a teacher at Florida Bible College.
The other leaders of this study had attended that college
in Florida as well.* I wanted to discuss the issue of
repentance once again with Stan over the phone. It was
hard for me to let go of the idea that entrance into Heaven
could not be conditioned on our turning from our sin. So
I asked him the worst hypothetical question I could
imagine: Suppose a guy were raping a girl and trusted
Christ as his Savior while in the act, and then finished
raping her and then killed her; would he be saved?
       Stan maintained that while such a thing might be
psychologically impossible, nevertheless, for the sake of
theoretical discussion, if it were granted that such a person
actually trusted in Christ as his Savior, then, yes, he would
be saved.
       In making this affirmation, Stan was being
consistent with his FG perspective. He believed that
saving grace, the grace that saves you from Hell, is not
conditioned on your performance regardless of the
circumstances. This was the straw that broke the camel’s
back of my resistance to FG theology. Stan was consistent
in his FG theology. I was not able to be consistent in my
*
    Florida Bible College is a FG school. See
www.floridabiblecollege.com. Incidentally, I had not
heard from Stan in decades, but, as it turned out, I was
attending a regional FG Bible study put on by GES in the
spring of 2017 and met Stan at the conference. He had
returned to Florida Bible College and was now the
president!
A Tribute to Dad                                    Page 13
LS theology. My conditioning a gift on performance just
did not make sense, especially when the Bible insists that
this gift is offered to sinners if they will just believe in
Christ for this gift.
       At last, I finally embraced FG theology and set out,
over the years since then, to answer any remaining
exegetical and theological questions I may have about it,
which is why I have written so many books discussing and
defending it. Back in those days, though, FG literature
was not nearly so plentiful as it is today, and I am research
oriented. So I asked Stan who I could contact for further
FG instruction. He told me to contact Bob Wilkin, who
was in the process of starting a new ministry called Free
Grace Society.* This would go on to become the premier
FG organization in the world. I joined at the ground level.
       After graduating from seminary, I pastored a
church in Virginia. Then an opening became available at
the church my Dad had pastored in Morganton, NC. He
had accepted a pastorate in Brevard, NC, at that time. I
was called as the pastor of the church in Morganton—my
home church, the church that I had attended during my
junior and high school years. I was eager to present FG
theology. So I began preaching through the Gospel of
John and teaching a Sunday School class using Charles
Stanley’s book, Eternal Security: Can you be Sure? It is
a great FG book!
       Some might think that FG advocates would have a
soft view on sin. They would be wrong! I preached very
strongly against the president’s attempt at the time to lift
the ban on homosexuals in the military and his pro-
abortion position, and I publicly prayed in our church that
he would repent of his position on these matters. The
deacons demanded that I stop preaching against abortion
and homosexuality. I refused. Submission to the Lordship
*
  See www.faithalone.org. They have many Free Grace
resources.
Page 14                                  A Tribute to Grace
of Christ demanded that I remain true to my convictions
about homosexuality and abortion and speak out against
these sins even though the president was promoting
them.* Doing so expedited my termination from that
church. But two other issues, dealing more directly with
my FG theology, were probably the principle underlying
factors.†
       The deacons had told me to stop asking the people
in the church, “Why should God let you into Heaven?”
This is a popular evangelistic question and was even used
by our Home Mission Board in their evangelistic tract, as
I pointed out to the deacons at the time.
    Illustration 1. Why should God let you into Heaven?




       While visiting our members in their homes, I would
ask this question and then draw three circles illustrated
above to clarify the possible answers. Next, I would tell
our members that the first two circles represent wrong
answers to the question and cross the wrong circles out as
I explained. The first circle is the wrong answer because
it signifies those who are trusting in works to get them
into Heaven. But you cannot be saved from Hell by works.

*
  Free Grace theology strongly affirms the Lordship of
Christ, but not as a performance requirement to enter
Heaven. Rather, such submission is necessary for
fellowship with the Lord now and for rewards in Heaven
in the hereafter.
†
  See http://misthology.org/pdf/articles/Termination.pdf.
A Tribute to Dad                                    Page 15
For the Bible says that since salvation from Hell “is by
grace, it is no longer on the basis of works, otherwise
grace is no longer grace” (Rom 11:6). So I would cross
out the first circle since it nullifies grace.*
       Similarly, the second circle is the wrong answer
because it signifies those who are trusting in Jesus and
their works to get them into Heaven. But you cannot be
saved by faith and works. For the Bible warns that we are
“justified by faith apart from works” (Rom 3:28). I would
cross out the second circle since it also nullifies grace.
       Finally, I would tell our members that the third
circle represents the correct answer because it signifies
someone who is trusting in Jesus alone for salvation. You
are saved by faith alone in Christ alone. Eternal life is a
free gift and must be received as a free gift. It cannot be
received any other way. “For by grace you have been
saved through faith; and that not of yourselves, it is the
gift of God; not as a result of works, that no one should
boast” (Eph 2:8-9). “The free gift of God is eternal life in
Christ” (Rom 6:23). We are “justified as a gift by His
grace” (Rom 3:24).†
       By and large, our members could not accept this
simple illustration. Our people were confused by the
simplicity of grace because they had been taught Lordship
Salvation by my Dad and every other pastor they had ever
had. My question unmasked their state of confusion.
When I asked this question in their homes, the
overwhelming majority of our members said that the
reason God should let them into Heaven is because they
did the best they could to live a good life. They give the
answer represented by circle number one—a wrong
*
  About 80% of the time, our members would give a
response that put them in the first circle, about 10% of the
time in the second circle, and about 10% of the time in the
third circle.
†
  See http://misthology.org/pdf/tracts/God_loves_you.pdf.
Page 16                                  A Tribute to Grace
answer. Some others said that the reason God should let
them into Heaven is because they do the best they can to
live a good life and trust in Jesus as their Savior. They
give the answer represented by circle number two—a
wrong answer. Only a very small minority of our
members would give the correct answer when I initially
asked them why God should let them into Heaven.
        Therefore, when I showed the majority of the
members which circle their answers represented versus
which circle represents the correct answer, they became
upset and attributed their lack of ability to answer the
question correctly to confusion in my presentation. In
actuality, however, the confusion was not in my
presentation but in their understanding. They simply
could not let go of the Lordship Salvation notion that
salvation from Hell necessitated good performance.
        In fact, some responded with disagreement rather
than with embarrassment. They criticized me by saying
that I was teaching that good works are not important. On
the contrary, I believe that good works and living a good
life are very important, but such performance has nothing
to do with getting into Heaven. Most of our people
seemed to think that getting into Heaven is all that really
matters. I disagreed strongly!
        Granted, if getting into Heaven is the only thing
that really matters, then the only thing that really matters
is whether you believe, according to that part of my
presentation. The way you live would not really matter in
terms of Heaven. But that conclusion is terribly wrong
because getting into Heaven is not all that really matters.
Therefore, I tried to lay a biblical foundation in their
thinking by showing them what the Bible has to say about
the works of believers who get into Heaven. Specifically,
I would show them what the Bible teaches about the
Judgment Seat of Christ (2Cor 5:10; 1Cor 3:11-15;
Mt 25:14-30; etc.).
A Tribute to Dad                                    Page 17
       The point I made was that, on the basis of the
Judgment Seat of Christ, the Lordship of Christ cannot be
ignored without suffering serious consequences. Carnal
Christians who ignore the Lordship of Christ will suffer
the consequences. Paul uses the analogy of having one’s
house burned down to picture the loss a carnal Christian
will suffer in the hereafter, not in Hell but in Heaven, as a
result of the Judgment Seat of Christ: “He shall suffer
loss; but he himself shall be saved, yet so as through fire”
(1Cor 3:15). Next, I generally would inform our church
members, “Although there may be disagreement as to the
nature and duration of that suffering, there should be no
disagreement as to the fact of that suffering since the
Bible explicitly teaches it” (1Cor 3:15).
       After reading 1Cor 3:11-15 and making my
statement concerning suffering, I would then read Jesus’
words in Mt 25:14-30 concerning the parable of the
talents and point out that this passage is to be understood
metaphorically, not literally, since the “talents” in the
parable are not literal sums of money. In the parable, the
servant who served the Lord poorly was thrown into the
“outer darkness.” Thus, I would explain that we should
understand this parabolic outer darkness as metaphorical
rather than literal. Moreover, since the Lord did not
entrust the work of His kingdom to the lost, the “slaves”
in the parable represent Christians. Further, the
relationship of these slaves to their Master is identical.
Each of them belong to Him. The purpose of the judgment
within the parable is not to see whether these servants
believe in Him (each of the slaves believe their
Master/Lord is returning); the purpose is to see if they had
worked for Him. The purpose is not to see if they are
believers, but workers; not to see if they are genuine
servants, but faithful servants; not to see if they are
genuine believers, but faithful believers.
Page 18                                  A Tribute to Grace
       Accordingly, I then pointed out that the lazy
Christian within the parable who is thrown into the outer
darkness suffers loss—not the loss of salvation, but the
loss of serving his Master. The carnal Christian misses out
on the joy of ruling over his Master’s house. The result is
weeping. Thus, the parable presents some Christians as
ruling with Jesus in Heaven because they have taken His
Lordship seriously. Conversely, the parable presents
some Christians as weeping in Heaven because they have
taken His Lordship carelessly. These unfaithful Christians
will suffer the loss of ruling with Christ in Heaven.
       The gospel is not, “Trust in Jesus, do the best you
can, and hope you will go to Heaven.” Rather, it is, “Trust
in Jesus, know you are a child of the King and are going
to Heaven, and then live like a child of the King so that
you can rule with Him in Heaven.” Next, I would refer
our people to Charles Stanley’s excellent book, Eternal
Security, if they would like to do further reading regarding
salvation or rewards (especially the outer darkness).*
*
  In addition to Stanley’s book, I also had two other books
concerning the doctrine of rewards placed in our church
library at the time, which I suggested that our people read,
especially if they wanted more information concerning
the outer darkness. One was Grace in Eclipse by Zane
Hodges, and the other was The Reign of The Servant
Kings by Joseph Dillow. Years later, Dillow released an
expanded discussion in his latest book, Final Destiny.
After two decades of research, I finished my magnum
opus, in a two-volume book by that title: The Outer
Darkness. As Dillow acknowledges: “Marty Cauley’s
work on the Darkness Outside may be the most extensive
and thorough discussion of this theme in the history of the
Church.” Joseph C. Dillow, Final Destiny: The Future
Reign of the Servant Kings, 20th edition (Monument, CO:
Paniym Group, 2014), 1023. Since that time, I have
A Tribute to Dad                                    Page 19
      Many people in the church were offended by such
a message. But if Jesus’ words offend people, am I to
blame? I had to choose between offending people by
reading and applying Jesus’ words versus offending Jesus
by being ashamed to read and apply His words. I chose to
offend them rather than Him. After all, I will be standing
before Him, not them, at the Judgment Seat of Christ.

                   The Transition
       After my termination as pastor of that church,
Dianne and I moved into the basement of my Dad’s house
in Brevard. She worked; I continued with my biblical
research. Since my Dad was the pastor, he would give me
opportunity to preach occasionally. However, he was
teaching LS theology, and I was teaching FG theology.
We would both preach our convictions. Naturally, some
discussions of our differences were inevitable. I do not
recall any of our sermons, but I certainly recall his
summation. He told me that under any other
circumstances he would not allow anyone who believed
what I did to preach in his pulpit!
       He tried to soft-pedal the logical inconsistencies of
his LS teaching by saying that the free gift of eternal life
was at least conditioned on your willingness to turn from
your sins. I would not budge. “How could a free gift be
conditioned on your willingness to perform better?” was
my question. By conditioning the reception of the free gift
on even this level of repentance, he was still conditioning
the free gift on performance. Logically and biblically, I
found his LS position indefensible. Personally, I had
found it to lead to despair when it came to a firm and full
assurance of salvation.



written other books expanding my treatment of that
theme. For example, see my series, Misthological Models.
Page 20                                  A Tribute to Grace
       According to the Bible, we are not only judged for
what we do but also for our motives (Prov 16:2; 1Cor 4:5),
as well as our “thoughts and intentions” (Heb 4:12). But
judgment is always based on works. Thus, the works for
which we are judged include our motives, thoughts, and
intentions. In short, the intention to work is a work, and
we will be judged and rewarded or punished for our
intentions. Therefore, if the free gift of eternal life is
conditioned, even in part, on our intention to perform
better, then it is conditioned, to that degree, on our works
since our intention to perform better is a work.
       But, as already noted above, the Bible teaches that
we cannot be saved by faith and works. The F & W circle
in Illustration 1. Why should God let you into Heaven?
represents a wrong answer, a lack of understanding, a
false gospel. We cannot be saved from Hell by faith and
works, and the intention to perform better is a work.
Therefore, we cannot be saved from Hell by conditioning
that salvation on our intention to perform better.
       Nevertheless, I do not recall such sophisticated
arguments having any real impact on my Dad. And I
cannot really say that I blame him. After all, as you see
from my background above, it took me years to break
completely free of the performatist mentality. My Dad,
however, made the transition much more quickly than I
did, primarily for two reasons.
       One observation that carried much more persuasive
punch for him was the fact that the Gospel of John leaves
out any reference to repentance. The Gospel of John uses
the verb believe about a hundred times, repeatedly
conditioning eternal life on what you believe, and thus on
faith alone—not on performance. Moreover, the Gospel
of John is the only evangelistic book in the Bible.
Whereas the other gospels by Matthew, Mark, and Luke
end with the great commission to make disciples (since
they were written for those who already are believers), the
A Tribute to Dad                                    Page 21
Gospel of John ends with the great invitation to become a
believer: “Many other signs therefore Jesus also
performed in the presence of the disciples, which are not
written in this book; but these have been written that you
may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and
that believing you may have life in His name” (Jn 20:30-
31). This invitation is simply an encapsulation of John’s
entire gospel presentation, which is to believe in Jesus for
eternal life (cp. Jn 3:16; 5:24; 6:47). John purposefully
omits any reference to the verb repent or the noun
repentance in his gospel, which are found frequently in
the other three gospels. Why?
       My answer was that John was demonstrating that
the gift of eternal life is not conditioned on repentance.
Without a doubt, repentance is a very important part of
discipleship and is important for several other reasons,
such as rewards. Since rewards are conditioned on works,
and since repentance results in rewards, repentance is a
work. Therefore, the free gift of eternal life cannot
possibly be conditioned on repentance.
       That point softened my Dad up to the FG message.
Nevertheless, for him, surprisingly, the decisive argument
was my pointing out his inconsistency in affirming the
reality of carnal Christians while maintaining Lordship
Salvation. Denials that there is any such thing as carnal
Christians are not uncommon in the LS camp. A variety
of reasons for such denials are put forth. I refute such
arguments in my book, Carnal Corinth.
       Let’s just keep it simple for this discussion, though.
To an extent, one can see the LS point. For example, if the
free gift of eternal life is conditioned on your intention to
perform better, then it is consistent to argue that the gift
of eternal life is conditioned on your performance.
Further, could it really be maintained that you were
sincere in your willingness to perform better if you do not
actually perform better? Thus, in LS theology, your
Page 22                                     A Tribute to Grace
performance is readily made a litmus test to prove if you
really were sincere and thus whether you really are saved.
        Performatists, if they are consistent, are proveitists.
According to that mentality, you have to live a good life
to prove that you are really saved. To be saved, in the end,
you have to behave along the way; otherwise, your
behavior will prove that your never were saved in the first
place. In their LS theology, Jn 3:16 ends up meaning: “For
God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten
Son, that whoever behaves in Him should not perish, but
have eternal life.” After all, if the way you live proves
whether you are saved, then how can you persistently
behave in a carnal way and genuinely claim to be saved?
        However, my Dad correctly perceived, beyond any
shadow of any doubt, that many Christians are carnal and
that the Bible affirms the reality of carnal Christians.
Consequently, he reached a crossroads where he had to
choose between maintaining this belief or rejecting
Lordship Salvation. The whole LS argument would fall
like a house of cards if he simply acknowledged that LS
was wrong in conditioning your reception of the free gift
of eternal life on any promise to perform better.
        My Dad eventually embraced the FG message as a
result. God does not condition the free gift of eternal life
on your promise or intention to perform better because He
does not condition this gift on your performance. Your
performance has nothing to do with it! The sole issue, as
far as the reception of the free gift of eternal life is
concerned, is whether you will simply trust Christ to give
it to you—with no strings attached. None!
        Before proceeding, though, let’s pause and give
 you the opportunity to make the same transition that my
 Dad and I made. Hopefully, you have been able to follow
 this discussion, and learn from our mistakes, and can
 make the transition more quickly than we did. If you
 believe in Jesus (rather than in your performance) for
A Tribute to Dad                                       Page 23
eternal life as a free gift, then you can place your name in
the following blank and know for certain that you have
eternal life in the present, will unconditionally have it
forever, and thus will have a home with Jesus in Heaven
in the future.

  “For God so loved the world, that He gave His only

begotten Son, that __________________ believes in Him
                         whoever

    will not perish, but have eternal life” (Jn 3:16).

                     The Stool
       Proceeding now to the illustration that came to my
mind that night when my Dad asked me to speak at his
funeral, that sermonic download can be summarized with
a barstool.
        Illustration 2. Full-Fledged LS Performatist
Page 24                                 A Tribute to Grace


       Imagine that this barstool represents your
performance as a Christian. Standing on the stool with
both feet represents full-fledged performance from a
performatist perspective.* We can call this the
performatist stool. Standing on it represents trusting in
your performance for the Lord from a performatist
mentality, such as what my Dad had when he was the
pastor of a church in White Lake. You are trying very hard
to please the Lord but doing so in your own strength, and,
even worse, you think your performance has something to
do with your reaching Heaven. You labor furiously but
are seriously defeated internally. It may be eating you up
inside, making you miserable. Does this performance
really count for anything, though, in terms of being
genuinely able to please the Lord? No.
       For one thing, as we have seen, you cannot be
saved by trusting in your performance for Christ. God
actually sees such performance as no better than a filthy
rag (Is 64:6). Such performance cannot qualify you to
enter Heaven or even qualify you for rulership in Heaven.
To be sure, as depicted in the parable of the talents,
performance as a good servant is necessary to rule in
Heaven. But you must become the Lord’s servant first, by
trusting in His free provision, so that you belong to Him
as His blood-bought servant.
       At that point, Christ becomes your Lord and Master
in terms of your Owner. He owns you. He paid the price
for your redemption. But you must accept His payment
for you rather than try to pay your own way to Heaven.
As a result of doing so, you are bought with the price of
His blood (1Cor 6:20; 7:3) and granted redemption (the
forgiveness of your sins) as God’s purchased possession
(Eph 1:7,14; Col 1:14). Now, you need to learn how to
*
  Standing on the barstool with both feet represents
frontend plus backend LS performance.
A Tribute to Dad                                    Page 25
perform in a pleasing manner by the enabling power of
the Holy Spirit so you can experience His victory.
       The Bible says that unless the Lords builds the city,
you labor in vain in your service for the Lord (Ps 127:1).
Unless you are laboring according to His power working
within you, your service is in vain (Col 1:29). Learning
how to draw upon His strength to live the Christian life
will remove the frustration and enable you to experience
peace as you serve the Lord (Gal 5:22-23). In the end, you
will get to rule with Christ.
       But what if you were saved earlier in your life by
grace, and then subsequently embraced the performatist
mentality that good works were somehow necessary to
reach Heaven? This very thing happened to the church at
Galatia, and Paul told them that they had “fallen from
grace.” No longer were they abiding in the strength which
Christ supplies, instead they were “severed from Christ,”
as Paul warns them succinctly: “You have been severed
from Christ, you who are seeking to be justified by law;
you have fallen from grace” (Gal 5:4). And in terms of
inheriting the kingdom (Gal 5:21), Christ would profit
them nothing” (Gal 5:2). Performatists, unfortunately,
confuse inheriting the kingdom with entering the
kingdom.
       Their error defies both Scripture and common
sense. According to the Bible, inheriting the kingdom is a
reward (Col 3:23-25). If you inherit the kingdom, it will
be as a kingdom ruler. Common sense would also tell you
that entering and inheriting something are not necessarily
the same thing. If someone enters your house, does that
mean that they are now qualified to inherit your house?
Of course not! God conditions His children’s inheritance
of the kingdom upon their performance because He
conditions their rulership on their performance. If we
suffer hardships with Christ by following Christ, we will
rule with Christ (2Tim 2:12).
Page 26                                   A Tribute to Grace
       God-enabled performance on the part of His
children, if it is based on FG theology, counts dearly
toward inheriting the kingdom. But this same
performance counts for nothing regarding inheriting the
kingdom if it is based upon LS premises. Consequently,
in terms of qualifying to inherit the kingdom, Dad’s work
at White Lake will go up in smoke at the Judgment Seat
of Christ. My advice is to work but to make that work
count!
          Illustration 3. Frontend LS Performatist




       What about my Dad’s subsequent preaching at
Morganton? By this point he had made a transition from
being a full-fledged performatist to being a partial
performatist. At this point, he was no longer depending on
his performance on the backend to live the Christian life.
Instead, he was learning to rely upon the Holy Spirit to do
A Tribute to Dad                                     Page 27
so. However, the problem was that, on the frontend, he
was still preaching Lordship Salvation.* He was still
requiring repentance and commitment for the initial
reception of the free gift of eternal life. Thus, he was still
preaching a false gospel, which is accursed (Gal 1:8-9). It
was like he was standing with his right foot on the
performatist stool and hobbling around with his left foot
trying to serve the Lord. I did this while in high school.
Yes, doing so is easier than trying to serve the Lord while
standing on the performatist stool with both feet. Still, it
is far from ideal.
          Illustration 4. Backend LS Performatist




*
  Standing on the barstool with just the right foot
represents frontend LS performance.
Page 28                                   A Tribute to Grace
       Performatists like John Piper will object. Piper
conditions entrance into Heaven on your performance but
believes that doing so is permissible since he conditions it
on your God-enabled performance.* Since I respond to
such arguments at length in my book, Mere Christianity
and Moral Christianity, I will not take time to do so here.
Rather, let it be observed that God-enabled works are still
works and are thus ruled out as means to reach Heaven in
the second circle of Illustration 1. Why should God let you
into Heaven?† Even if such performatism does not hobble
the gospel on the frontend, it certainly does on the
backend. It is like trying to serve the Lord while standing
on the stool with your left foot, that is, with backloaded
performatism. You are still trying to live a good life so
that you can qualify to go to Heaven. Entrance into the
kingdom of Heaven is not a free gift in this performatistic
theology.




*
  Standing on the barstool with just the left foot represents
backend LS performance.
†
  God-enabled legalism is still legalism. See my books,
The Outer Darkness, Woolly Wolves and Woolless Sheep,
and Trichotomy. The God-enabled experience of legalists
is a counterfeited or contaminated victory and, at best, is
inconsistent. It falls short of qualifying for inheriting the
kingdom and, in many cases, it prevents legalists from
even qualifying for entering the kingdom.
A Tribute to Dad                                    Page 29
            Illustration 5. Zero LS Performatist




         The Free Grace solution is to step down off the LS
performatist stool with both feet. Do not condition
entrance into Heaven on your performance—either on the
frontend or backend. From start to finish, salvation from
Hell is by grace through faith apart from works. Jesus paid
it all, the full purchase price of your redemption, not just
the down payment.
                   Illustration 6. Run the Race
Page 30                                     A Tribute to Grace


        For sake of summary, let’s use this imagery. You
cannot run a race while standing on a stool. Get down off
the Lordship Salvation performatist stool and start
running the Free Grace race with a full range of
movement as the Spirit leads you through the Scripture.
You can perform a whole lot better if you are not trying
to stand on a performatist stool while you run. Stepping
down with one foot so that you can hobble with the other
will not suffice. Hopping off the legalistic performatist
stool is essential. We are to lay aside ever encumbrance
that prevents us from running this race (Heb 12:1). We are
to run forward toward the finish line for the prize of
rulership, not backward toward the starting line for the
gift of regeneration. Legalists cannot run forward because
they are still trying to settle basic issues of assurance.

                   The Concern
        If you are consistent, embracing the freedom you
have in Christ (via Free Grace theology) entails adopting
a concern for those who are locked into Lordship
Salvation. Legalists are either going to burn in the fires of
Hell or weep in the outer darkness of Heaven. If they have
never stepped down off the performance stool long
enough to believe in Christ alone for eternal life as a free
gift, then they do not have the free gift of eternal life. This
gift must be received as a gift. God will not give it as a
wage. Alternatively, if sometime earlier in their lives they
trusted exclusively in Christ for eternal life as a free gift
but, subsequently, have put one or both feet on the LS
performatist stool, then they have made the same mistake
that the Galatians did, and everything is at stake in terms
of forfeiting their potential position of ruling with Christ
in His coming kingdom.
        My concern, therefore, if you are reading this
booklet at my Dad’s funeral and were a member of one of
A Tribute to Dad                                    Page 31
his earlier churches, such as Morganton, then you might
be in danger of burning in Hell for the simple reason that
your performance counts for nothing in saving you from
Hell and can prevent you from entering Heaven if you are
trusting in your performance for what was supposed be a
free gift. Moreover, good performance does not even help
save you from loss of rewards in the outer darkness if you
are a legalist. By keeping two feet or even one foot
planted on the performatist stool, you are nullifying any
chance you have of living for Christ in such a way that it
will really count in terms of inheriting the kingdom.
       This is not to say that everyone supposedly saved
or living the Spirit-filled life in a LS church will
necessarily fail to inherit the kingdom. Lordship
Salvationists are notoriously inconsistent. I believe that I
was genuinely saved at an early age under my Dad’s
preaching. His inconsistency (and mine) allowed me to
respond savingly, in a moment of oscillation, when I
trusted in Christ exclusively for eternal life. The
genuineness of my salvation at that early age is attested
by the fact that I had such a strong assurance of my
salvation that, by the time I reached college, I could attend
a Church of Christ Bible study and boldly maintain my
belief in my unconditional security. Since my Dad’s
teaching was pretty much the only teaching I had heard
until that time, a large part of my credit for being able to
hold to such a high degree of assurance would have to be
attributed to my Dad’s ministry, even though he was still
a Lordship Salvationist at the time! Additionally, thanks
to my Dad’s teaching on the Spirit-filled life, I had learned
to depend upon the Spirit for my performance.
       Nevertheless, my assurance was still marred by
periods of doubt in which I questioned my salvation
because of the baggage of Lordship Salvation. Upon more
mature reflection, many years later, I would have to
conclude that whatever level of Spirit-filled performance
Page 32                                       A Tribute to Grace
that I obtained in that state would be insufficient to qualify
for inheriting the kingdom.* Whatever degree of heavenly
reward that might be expected for my Spirit-enabled
performance at the time would have been insufficient to
qualify me for being a kingdom ruler. Therefore, I would
have to deduce that the majority of those who sat under
my Dad’s teaching in Morganton would be in the same
boat, especially since 90% of them gave a performance-
based answer when, years later, I asked them why God
should let them into Heaven. Still, on the positive side,
10% gave an exclusively grace-based answer. Therefore,
in my estimation, only these had any real hope of
inheriting the kingdom. Still, at least these 10% seemed
to be running the race of grace in such a way to inherit the
kingdom. So all hopes of inheriting the kingdom are not
necessarily lost even if one is attending a Lordship
Salvation church.
                  Illustration 7. LS Pastor




      During a period of inconsistency in the LS
message, some within a LS congregation might genuinely
believe the gospel of grace. For example, the pastor at a
LS church I attended during my seminary days in Wake
Forest taught salvation by grace through faith apart from
*
 See “Theory of Misthological Relativity” in my book,
The Outer Darkness.
A Tribute to Dad                                    Page 33
works for three solid months. Then the other proverbial
shoe hit the floor, and he started speaking out of the other
side of his mouth, making salvation from Hell
conditioned grace that works. A visitor to the church
could have been saved during those three months of FG
teaching and then maintained that perspective despite the
pastor’s inconsistency. The odds of that happening are
low, however. The chances of a parishioner being more
consistent than the pastor are not very high in the
parishioner’s favor.*

                   The Reward
      Earlier I mentioned that my preaching against
homosexuality was part of the reason that the church at
Morganton fired me. Let me ask you this question, “What
would a homosexual have to do to go to Heaven?” Pause
a minute. Lay this booklet down and think about it. Write
your answer in the box below before proceeding.
             Illustration 8. Test Case Question
      What must a homosexual do to go to Heaven?
    Write your answer here:




       Before we proceed to the correct answer, let me
relate some more background information. A deacon in
the church at Morganton criticized my preaching against

*
  See “Appendix 2. Oscillation is not Salvation” in my
book, Woolly Wolves and Woolless Sheep. Such
consistency would not be necessary to enter the kingdom
since if you ever believe in Christ alone for eternal life
you are eternally secure. But consistency would be
necessary to inherit the kingdom since legalistic believers
will not inherit the kingdom.
Page 34                                   A Tribute to Grace
homosexuality by responding, “Homosexuals have rights
too.” I agreed but countered: “Homosexuals have rights,
but homosexuality is not right; it is a sin.” For example,
child abusers have rights, but that does not mean that child
abuse is right! He said that “probably 80% of the church”
would agree with me that “homosexuality is wrong.” I
responded that I wished that it was a 100%! The vocal
20% who believed that homosexuality is not wrong were
certainly causing me a lot of grief.
       Let’s also pursue another point. In my sermon, I
had said that gay bashing is wrong. We are to love
homosexuals, but we are supposed to hate and oppose
homosexuality (and child abuse). In Dad’s latter years,
after he embraced Free Grace theology, he became fond
of stressing that, as NT believers, we are not under the OT
Law. In theological circles, this is a major point of
dispensationalism, and I am a dispensationalist. We are
not in the dispensation of the Law, but the dispensation of
Grace. Under the Mosaic Law, homosexuals in Israel
were to “be put to death” (Lev 20:13). We are not under
that law. So do not use it to justify gay bashing.
Nevertheless, in the church age, the age of grace, we are
to follow Paul’s example in warning homosexuals that
they will not inherit the kingdom of God: “Do not be
deceived; neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers,
nor effeminate, nor homosexuals, nor thieves, nor the
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor swindlers, shall
inherit the kingdom of God” (1Cor 6:9-10). Paul gives
similar vice-lists in Gal 5:19-21 and Eph 5:4-5, again
warning Christians in each passage that those who
practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.
The reasonable implication is that some believers within
the church were guilty of such things—homosexuality
included.
       Paul would not have warned these Christians
against the dangers of practicing homosexuality if they
A Tribute to Dad                                     Page 35
were not in danger of being disqualified from inheriting
the kingdom by practicing this sin. Being a homosexual
did not prevent them from being believers, though.
        What is necessary for you to be a believer? Belief.
Specifically, you must believe in Jesus for the free gift of
eternal life—or its biblical equivalent, such as the free gift
of salvation or redemption. You must believe that as a
result of simply believing in Jesus for eternal life, you
have this free gift and will be with Him in His kingdom
as a result. However, this does not mean that you will
inherit His kingdom. As already noted, if you offer to let
me enter your house, this does not mean that you are
allowing me to inherit your house. Likewise, in such
passages, we must distinguish between entering and
inheriting the kingdom.
        So, how did you fill in the box in response to the
Illustration 8. Test Case Question, what must a homosexual
do to go to Heaven? A jailer, who imprisoned Paul for
preaching the gospel, asked, “What must I do to be
saved?” Paul responded, “Believe in the Lord Jesus”
(Acts 16:31). Regardless of what your sin is, be it
homosexuality or imprisoning those who preach the
gospel, the answer is the same. Believe in the Lord Jesus
for eternal life as a gift, and He will give you eternal life
as a gift. The only thing a homosexual must do, or anyone
else can do for that matter, in order to enter the kingdom
of Heaven, is simply to believe in the Lord Jesus for the
free gift of kingdom entrance.
        Contrarywise, a performatist is going to respond, in
some form or fashion, by throwing in a change of
behavior into the answer, either on the frontend or
backend. It doesn’t matter if they are throwing both feet,
their right foot, or their left foot into the answer; they are
wrong to add a change in their performance as a
requirement for homosexuals to go to Heaven.
Page 36                                     A Tribute to Grace
        Nevertheless, performatists will insist that
homosexuals must submit to the Lordship of Christ in
order to be saved. That assessment is true, but not in the
manner given by performatists. How would the jailer need
to submit to the Lordship of Christ in Acts 16:31 in order
to be saved? He would simply need to believe in the Lord
Jesus for the requested salvation. The passage teaches
salvation by faith, not by works. Trying to work your way
into Heaven is to disobey rather than to obey the Lord.
        Jesus is Lord. He is God. The kingdom of Heaven
is His kingdom. He is the one who gets to determine who
gets in and who does not and what we must do to enter
His kingdom. He has decreed that those who believe in
Him for salvation apart from works get this gift and
entrance into His kingdom as a result. But they must
receive this entrance as a gift. They cannot earn it as a
reward. However, He also has decreed that once believers
have received this gift of kingdom entrance, they are to
serve Him as their Lord in order to earn the reward of
kingdom rulership. Failure to do so will result in their
failing to inherit the kingdom. Entrance into the kingdom
is offered freely; inheriting the kingdom is costly.
        For believers to earn the reward of the inheritance,
they must work at overcoming their fleshly passions. Just
like everyone else, homosexual believers must overcome
their sinful passions if they want to inherit the kingdom.
The Bible promises some terrific rewards to those
believers who overcome (Rev 2-3). For present purposes,
though, this summary will suffice. The inheritance of the
kingdom is a reward issue, a misthological issue,* not a
gift issue.
*
  Misthology is a coined term derived from the Greek
words misthos (reward) and logos (teaching) and refers to
the doctrine of temporal and eternal rewards but is used
primarily in relation to eternal rewards in Heaven. See
http://misthology.org/pdf/articles/Definition_of_Misthology.pdf.
A Tribute to Dad                                    Page 37
        After the funeral in Brevard that my parents
attended, a lady came up to my Dad and thanked him for
helping her get her life right with God via the message of
free grace that he had embraced during his pastorate
there—after he and I butted heads on the matter of FG for
a while. She had been a member of the church that Dad
had pastored in Brevard, but she had been a homosexual.
Through the foundation of FG theology and with
instruction about the Spirit-filled life, she had succeeded
in overcoming this fleshly passion. It was great to hear
this report! It sounds like she is well on her way to
inheriting the kingdom.
        Entrance was hers as a free gift when she believed.
Homosexuality did not change that fact. The inheritance
will become hers as a reward as she believingly performs,
that is, as she keeps her life right with God. Paul urged the
Corinthian believers “to be reconciled with God” and “not
to receive the grace of God in vain” (2Cor 5:20-6:1).* For
homosexual believers, being restored to fellowship with
God and qualifying for rulership with God requires that
they gain victory over the immorality of homosexuality.

              The Antinomians
       To be fair, however, my criticism of Lordship
Salvation must be tempered with a criticism of some in
the Free Grace camp who are antinomians.† They teach
that the way you live does not really matter.
       Some antinomians teach that you don’t need to get
right with God presently because you already are right
with God no matter how you live. According to them,
fellowship with God is not conditioned on confession or

*
 See my book, Carnal Corinth.
†
 Antinomians teach that the way you live does not really
matter regarding either (1) fellowship with God or
(2) rulership with God or (3) both.
Page 38                                  A Tribute to Grace
walking with God in the light. A passage such as 1Jn 1:5-
10 is twisted to be a relationship text rather than a
fellowship text, a text telling you how to get into Heaven
rather than how to have fellowship with God along the
way. Or this passage is said not to be applicable to church-
age believers because Paul did not write it, and only he is
the apostle of grace to church-age believers.* Or the
passage is said not to be conditional but only involving an
acknowledgement that your sins already are forgiven.†
       Other antinomians rightly teach that fellowship
with God is conditioned on your walk with God, hence
Paul’s frequent concern over a believer’s walk with God.
Yet these antinomians get fellowship right but then get
*
  The hyper-grace attempt to make the Pauline epistles a
corpus within a corpus is reminiscent of the error of
Maricon. Yet Paul taught that all Scripture is inspired by
God and profitable for teaching, even in the present grace
dispensation (2Tim 3:16-17). Even though we are not
under the OT law, the timeless truths of that OT law still
apply to believers today, as is proven by Paul’s frequent
implementation of the OT (e.g., 1Cor 10:11), even though
church-age believers are under the law of the Spirit
(Rom 8:2). Granted, indiscriminately applying the OT
directly to us today is wrong. But indirect application for
the underlying timeless principles is still expected. For
instance, even though the NT does not demand physical
death for homosexuality, homosexuals are still warned of
misthological death (i.e., death in terms of rewards), and
they are expected to be subject to negative temporal laws
(1Tim 1:8-10). See principlism in The Outer Darkness.
For discussion of how principlism applies to the Sermon
on the Mount, see Steve Elkins, Keys to Kingdom
Greatness: An Exposition of the Sermon on the Mount.
†
  For rebuttals to this form of FG antinomianism, see my
books, 4D Forgiveness and Carnal Corinth.
A Tribute to Dad                                    Page 39
rulership wrong. They think that rewards do not really
matter, posing that rewards: (1) are only temporary,
lasting at most for a thousand years; or (2) are eternal, but
not substantial; or (3) are eternal and objectively
substantial but not subjectively substantial, so that every
believer’s cup will be full of joy no matter how they live
or how few rewards they receive. The bottom line is that
FG antinomians insist that if you do not live for Christ
presently, you will not regret it in eternity.
       Since I refute these various forms and degrees of
FG antinomianism at length in my books, doing so here is
not necessary. Suffice it to say that rewards are eternal,
and the loss of rewards is eternal as well. If the loss is so
substantial that it prevents you from inheriting the
kingdom, then you will forfeit rulership with Christ and
regret it eternally. I am opposed to all forms of FG
antinomianism, regardless of which FG teachers are
promoting it, even if I must butt heads with them
personally or in my writings.* Just as Paul and Barnabas
had a sharp disagreement over another matter in
Acts 15:39, I have found it necessary to disagree with
some of my FG mentors and friends when they weaken
the necessity of eternal security or the importance of
eternal rewards.

                   Conclusion
       My Dad has left his children and grandchildren a
legacy of pursuing grace. This pursuit has spanned many
years and several pastorates. He has left us a worthy legacy
of Free Grace theology. Even though on some matters we
may disagree and think that he is dabbling a toe or two in a


*
  For rebuttals of Free Grace antinomianism pertaining to
rewards, see my books, The Outer Darkness, Rewards are
Eternal, and Misthological Models Part 1.
Page 40                                    A Tribute to Grace
                  *
hyper-grace view, we have benefited very much from his
instruction and are very appreciative of his godly example.
To our friends, co-workers, readers, and fellow parishioners,
we would enjoin you to join the pursuit of Free Grace
theology so that with Paul you may say, “ I have fought the
good fight, I have finished the course, I have kept the faith;
in the future there is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will
award to me on that day; and not only to me, but also to all
who have loved His appearing” (2Tim 4:7-8). But I must
warn Lordship Salvationists that they are disqualified from
winning such a race. They will not love Christ’s appearing
when they appear before Him only to be cast away from Him
into Hell or the outer darkness.†




*
  While working on the present book, my brother, Phil,
and I discussed Joseph Prince’s view of forgiveness in
which Prince asserts that confession of sin is not
necessary for believers since all their sins are forgiven
already. We disagree with Prince on this matter. See
http://misthology.org/pdf/articles/Prince-of_Milk.pdf.
†
  Hell denotes absolute separation from God. The outer
darkness only denotes relative separation from God—a
separation relative to the doctrine of rewards. Unfaithful
believers will be with the Lord in His kingdom, but they
will not be with Him on His throne.
       Excursus on Eternal Life
       For those who think that the Free Grace message is
too simplistic to accommodate the biblical data, allow me
to share a rather fundamental illustration that I use in
several of my books for eternal life. For the sake of the
lay reader, I will simplify the discussion.*
     Illustration 9. Multidimensionality of Eternal Life




• Spiritual life is a gift: Mt 7:14; Jn 3:15-16,36; 4:14 (cp.
  4:10); 5:24; 6:40,47,54,68; 10:10a,28; Rom 5:18; 6:23;
  1Tim 1:16; 1Jn 5:11,13.
• Spiritual life is a reward: Mt 7:14; 19:16,29; 25:46; Mk
  10:17,30; Lk 10:25; 18:18,30; Jn 6:54,68; 10:10b,
  12:25; Rom 2:7; 5:21; 6:22; Gal 6:7-8; 1Thess 5:23;
  1Tim 6:12; Tit 1:2; 3:7; Jam 1:12; 1Pet 3:7; Rev 2:7,10-
  11; 7:17; 22:14.

*
  For much more advanced illustrations of this diagram,
see my book, Rewards are Eternal. This illustration is the
combination of two illustrations first developed by Scott
Crawford and myself. His book, Perseverance Pays, is a
commentary on James and notes that unfaithful believers
will “face death relative to the crown of life” (emphasis
his, 226)—which I would call misthological death. His
booklet, Hebrews: Five Warnings, properly applies the
warnings in Hebrews to carnal believers. Several FG
commentators would as well.
Page 42                                     A Tribute to Grace


        At times the Bible will present eternal life as a gift,
at other times as a reward; sometimes it does both even
within the same passage. Lordship Salvationists
misconstrue this relationship so as to suppose that the gift
is a reward or becomes a reward in the end. Nothing could
be further from the truth! The gift aspect of eternal life
remains a gift throughout eternity, as well as throughout
the course of one’s life. Conversely, the reward aspect of
eternal life remains a reward throughout eternity as well.
LS performatists who try to turn the gift into a reward by
the end of one’s life or FG antinomians who try to turn
the reward into a gift by the end of the millennium are
doing a great disservice to the richness of the biblical text.
As a general rule, there will be Hell to pay in the case of
the former, or the outer darkness to pay in the case of the
latter. Teaching a false gospel, either soteriologically or
misthologically, has the potential for very negative
consequences, both for those teaching it and for those
listening to it.
        Jesus came that we might not only have life
soteriologically, but also abundantly (Jn 10:10).* He
*
  The reader is already familiar with the word theology,
which is based on a combination of two biblical Greek
words: theos (God) and logos (teaching). Thus, theology
refers to biblical teaching about God. In similar fashion,
soteriology is based on two biblical Greek words, soteria
(salvation) and logos (teaching), and correspondingly
refers to biblical teaching about salvation. Although the
biblical concept of salvation includes many dimensions
other than deliverance from Hell, it is this aspect of
salvation to which writers refer frequently when they use
the word soteriology. Thus, salvation from Hell (or more
specifically, from eternal damnation in the Lake of Fire)
will be referred to as soteriological salvation. A
Excursus on Eternal Life                             Page 43
expects us to be able to perceive, at a minimum, a duality
of eternal life, actually a multidimensionality.* Even
though all believers have eternal life as a gift, not all
believers are currently experiencing it abundantly.
Campus Crusade does well in its Spirit-Filled Life tract in
illustrating this fact.
        The threshold of basic entrance into the kingdom is
a gift, unconditionally guaranteed to anyone who,
independently of their performance, has ever trusted in
Christ alone for this free gift. If graphed, the dynamic ups
and downs in the believer’s experience of eternal life
never fall below the static soteriological threshold. The
guarantee of the believer’s entrance into Heaven is not
impacted by the fluctuations in his or her performance.
But FG kingdom theology advances far beyond this rather
simplistic observation to note that the Spirit-filled life not
only results in an abundant experience of life now in the
present, in terms of intimacy with the Lord, but will also
result in an abundant entrance into the Kingdom, in terms
of rulership with the Lord. An abundant experience of the
fruit of the Spirit currently qualifies believers for an
abundant entrance into the Kingdom eschatologically (cp.
Gal 5:19-23; 2Pet 1:5-11).


soteriological interpretation of a passage thus would treat
the passage as dealing with eternal salvation from the
Lake of Fire (Rev 20:14-15).
*
  Even in Illustration 9, eternal life has three aspects:
(1) the permanent reception as a gift in the past, (2) the
possible experience as fellowship in the present, and
(3) the potential acquisition as a reward in the future.
Scripture also applies these soteriological, temporal, and
misthological levels to various other themes, such as:
grace, justification, forgiveness, righteousness, and
judgment.
Page 44                                  A Tribute to Grace
        The Bible encourages us to see eternal life from
multiple vantage points, sometimes even within the same
verse (e.g., Mt 7:14; Jn 6:54,68; 10:10). Similar
statements could be made about salvation. About 18% of
the time, salvation is a gift in the NT; about 51% of the
time, it is a present temporal experience; about 31% of the
time, it is a future acquisition.* We should not confuse the
gift of salvation (which is received by punctiliar faith )
with the reward of salvation (which is achieved by linear
faith ). Likewise, the Bible informs us that there is a
justification by faith and a justification by works: “You
see then that a man is justified by works, and not only
justified by faith” (Jam 2:24; TM). But trying to turn
soteriological justification by faith into misthological
justification by works will not work—not exegetically,
not logically, not soteriologically, not misthologically.




*
    See my book, Salvation.
      Excursus on Forgiveness
        Some ultra-dispensationalists try to make a canon
within the canon, limiting themselves to Pauline texts.*
Since Paul is the apostle to the church, they think that they
can ignore the rest of the Bible as not applying to the
church. In their estimation, church-age believers do not
have to confess their sins because Paul does not tell them
that confession is necessary. Rather, he tells them that all
their sins have been taken away and nailed to the cross, so
sin is no longer an issue for the believer. Such ultra-
dispensationalists assume that confession of sin is
unnecessary in the current dispensation as a result.
Wrong! These ultra-dispensationalists should go back and
read the history of the early church as recorded in Acts
regarding Paul’s own conversion no less!
        Although Paul was a new believer, he was told,
“Get up and be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling
on His name” (Acts 22:16). Paul’s preconversional sins
were still an issue for him as a new believer in the church
age and would remain an issue until he was baptized and
called upon the name of the Lord. Ananias already had
laid his hands upon Paul so that the scales had fallen from
Paul’s eyes, as he regained his sight and was filled with
the Holy Spirit (Acts 9:17-18). Yet Paul still needed to
have his sins forgiven! The notion that a believer’s sins
are no longer an issue is refuted by Paul’s own
conversion. He still needed forgiveness even though he
already was forgiven. We see the same thing in Acts 2:37-
38. These new believers needed to be baptized so that God

*
  The first part of this excursus is a very abbreviated
extract from my book, 4D Forgiveness. See that
discussion for further details. For Paul’s appeal for carnal
Christians to be reconciled to God, see my book, Carnal
Corinth.
Page 46                                 A Tribute to Grace
would forgive their preconversional sins! Wow! Talk
about throwing a monkey wrench into simplistic
theology! As new believers, all their sins were forgiven,
yet they still needed forgiveness, even for their
preconversional sins!
       Deem claims, “Forgiveness from sin only happens
through Jesus Christ when we believe in Him.”* Not true!
Paul’s own conversion mirrors the earlier conversion of
the Palestinian Jews and proves that, under those unique
historical circumstances, baptism was required for the
forgiveness of even preconversional sins for these new
believers.
       Preconversional sins are not the only issue for
believers, of course, even in Pauline material. In his
epistles Paul affirms that believers still sin (Rom 14:23;
1Cor 8:12; 1Cor 15:34; 2Cor 12:21-2Cor 13:2; Eph 4:26;
1Thess 5:22-24; 2Tim 3:6,11). In response to the
question, “Why [do] we need forgiveness when we have
already been forgiven”? Adams responds correctly that,
although as believers we already have received judicial
forgiveness from God as Judge, we still need forgiveness
from God as Father.† This paternal forgiveness is
necessary      for     familial    fellowship.‡     Ultra-


*
   Rich Deem, “Is Confession Necessary for the
Forgiveness of Sin for the Christian? Available at
http://www.godandscience.org/doctrine/confession.html.
Accessed on 9-30-2014. Yet Deem has the audacity to cite
Acts 2:38 as supporting his position when it actually
refutes it!
†
  Jay E. Adams, Ready to Restore: The Layman’s Guide
to Christian Counseling (Phillipsburg: Presbyterian and
Reformed Publishing Co., 1981), 58.
‡
   Paternal forgiveness is also referred to as filial
forgiveness. See “Four Types of Vertical Forgiveness” in
Excursus on Forgiveness                           Page 47
dispensationalists who reject this type of approach as
being non-Pauline have evidently glossed over some very
important Pauline texts.* How could you grieve the Spirit
(Eph 4:30) if you already are forgiven completely by the
Spirit in advance in regards to your fellowship? If God
neither sees nor remembers your sins familially, then how
can the Spirit be grieved by something He can neither see
nor remember? Furthermore, why would Paul condition
our experience of God’s Fatherhood on our practice, in a
passage stressing fellowship and harmony with our
Father, if such an experience is not conditioned on our
practice (2Cor 6:14-18)? How could Paul warn believers
about the possibility of being separated and severed from
Christ if their sins cannot create an estrangement from
Christ (Gal 5:4; Rom 11:22)?†
    Illustration 10. Sins Remembered in Pauline Corpus




my book, The Outer Darkness. Herein, I am using the
terms filial and familial synonymously.
*
  See “Forgiveness of Sin” in my book, Trichotomy.
†
   See my book, Fallen from Grace but Not from
Perfection.
Page 48                                   A Tribute to Grace
        Obviously, forgiveness and sanctification go hand
in hand (Heb 10:10-18). Paul teaches misthological
sanctification in a number of passages (Eph 1:4; 5:27;
Col 1:22-23; 2Tim 2:20-21). Those reading Col 2:13-14
as proof that all our sins have been forgiven
unconditionally in all strata should go back and read it in
context and observe that in Col 1:22-23 sanctification at
the highest stratum is conditioned on our present walk.
Being misthologically holy and blameless is conditional
for the believer. In stratifying sanctification Paul also has
stratified forgiveness. Misthological sinlessness is
conditioned on the believer’s performance. By collapsing
all these levels of forgiveness into one level, those
denying that confession is required for forgiveness in the
higher strata have done great violence to numerous texts.
    Excursus on Paul’s Divisions
       Paul divides humanity in 1Cor 3:1-3 into three
categories: natural, carnal, and spiritual.* Those
classified as natural are most readily identified as
unbelievers. Those designated as natural are outside the
kingdom, and Christ is outside their lives. When a person
trusts in Christ for eternal life, Christ comes into the
believer’s life and gives him or her spiritual life. The
person is transformed instantaneously and completely
into a new creature—a new creation. If this new believer
is taught how to experience the victorious Christian life,
he or she may experience the abundant life in the here-
and-now and, within the course of time, become spiritual.
      Illustration 11. Potential Sequence of Stages




        Unfortunately, a popular gospel tract, which
presents similar circle diagrams to illustrate this truth,
gives the lost person the potentially false impression that
it is possible to go from natural to spiritual in an instant.
But this is impossible. Granted, some who are converted
get an immediate taste of the abundant life. However,
even they take time to mature. Regrettably, that popular

*
 This extract is from my book, Carnal Corinth. See that
discussion for further details.
Page 50                                     A Tribute to Grace
gospel tract only presents two options to the lost reader:
to be natural (and go to Hell) or immediately become
spiritual (and go to Heaven). Salvation from Hell and
entrance into Heaven are tragically conditioned on one’s
maturity in Christ. Such a distortion of the biblical record
teaches a false dichotomy, an improper sequence, and a
false gospel. To its credit, however, this same
organization provides a second tract that illustrates three
possibilities—not just two. These two tracts should be
combined so that the true order and full spectrum are
presented to the lost person.
        You cannot bypass the carnal stage and go directly
to being spiritual any more than you can bypass spiritual
infancy and go directly to spiritual maturity.* Experiential
knowledge is necessary to move from the carnal to
spiritual category. Putting what you know intellectually
into experiential practice over a period of time is required
to gain true spirituality. Not even Paul could enable the
Corinthian believers to bypass the carnal stage. If they
were not able to bypass carnality under Paul’s tutorage,
then assuming that those whom we evangelize can bypass
infancy because we draw a few circles is arrogant.
Certainly, such illustrations can be very helpful, but they
must be conveyed with a strong sense of realism and an
accurate explanation. If presented in the logical and
biblical order, as in the above illustration, in which the
carnal stage is a necessary precursor to becoming
spiritual, then these types of diagrams become truly
useful.
        Because Paul’s discussion and his expected
transition to spirituality are highly dependent upon the
Holy Spirit, the Holy Spirit is pictured as a dove in the
illustration. As to the transition from the first to the second

*
  We are not born spiritual adults. Even Paul had to spend three
years growing up and learning how to transition from carnality
to spirituality.
Excursus on Forgiveness                                Page 51
circle, if the lost trust in Christ for eternal life before they
die, then, at that very moment, Christ will come into them
and permanently give them eternal life, even though they
have not yet surrendered the control of their lives to
Christ. They are thus carnal at the initial point of
conversion. They are sealed with the Holy Spirit, to be
sure, (2Cor 1:22; Eph 1:13), but He is dormant rather than
dominant in their lives. Christ, and thus the Holy Spirit,
will never leave them (Heb 13:5), even if they grieve the
Holy Spirit by failing to submit to the Lordship of Christ
(Eph 4:30). Still, if they die in this carnal state, they will
be cast into the outer darkness (which is inside of the
kingdom). They will be in the kingdom but miss the
rewards reserved for those believers who progress to
spiritual maturity.
        Alternatively, as to the potential transition from the
second to the third circle, if, after trusting in Christ for
eternal life as a free gift, carnal believers (by the power of
the Holy Spirit) move on to surrender the control of their
lives to the Lordship of Christ and learn how to live the
spirit-filled life, then they will have abundant life now in
the present (Jn 10:10).* Given time, they will become
what Paul wishes the Corinthians were—spiritual—that
is, Spirit-filled believers manifesting the fruit of the Spirit
(Gal 5:22-23). In that case, they will have an abundant
entrance into the kingdom in the future (2Pet 1:11). Not
only will they be in the kingdom, but they will rule the
kingdom.




*
 Christ Magnified by James Hollandsworth is a very good
FG overview of the Spirit-filled life. His book, The End
of the Pilgrimage, is a splendid discussion of biblical
rewards. He has the gift of making the complex simple.
These books would be great reading for new FG believers.
Page 52   A Tribute to Grace
                                            Indexes
Italic, regular, and bold fonts have been used for page
numbers within the indexes to rank entrees in terms of
emphases as: minor, medium, major.

                                          Greek Index
logos ........................................ 42    soteria ...................................... 42
misthos ..................................... 36     theos ......................................... 42


                                         Author Index
Adams ...................................... 46      Piper ......................................... 28
Crawford .................................. 41       Ponz ......................................... 12
Deem........................................ 46      Prince ....................................... 40
Dillow ...................................... 18     Stanley ............................... 13, 18
Hodges ..................................... 18      Wilkin ...................................... 13
Hollandsworth ......................... 51


                                        Subject Index
abortion .................................... 13     control of life ....................... 6, 51
abundant                                             corpus within a corpus ............. 38
    entrance ............................. 51        crossroads ................................ 22
    life.. .................................... 51   doubt ........................................ 31
antinomians ....................... 37, 38           estrangement ............................ 47
assurance ....................... 8, 19, 31          eternal life .................... 41, 42, 43
backend .................................... 28      evangelistic question ............... 14
baptism .................................... 45      familial
barstool .................................... 23          fellowship .......................... 46
behave .................................. 6, 22           forgiveness ......................... 46
believe ..................................... 20     fellowship ................................ 37
bought ...................................... 24     filial
Campus Crusade .................. 6, 43                   forgiveness ......................... 46
carnal ............................. 2, 21, 49       Florida Bible College .............. 12
    fleshly .................................. 2     forfeitists
    legalistic............................... 2           definition .............................. 8
    lukewarm ............................. 2         forgiveness ............................... 38
commit ....................................... 7          filial .................................... 46
confession ................................ 45            paternal .............................. 46
confusion ................................. 15       Four Spiritual Laws ........... 6, 7, 8
Page 54                                                              A Tribute to Grace
Free Grace                                            OT application ......................... 38
    definition............................ 11         outer darkness ........17, 30, 40, 51
Free Grace Society .................. 13              Owner....................................... 24
frontend.................................... 27       Paul’s conversion ..................... 45
GES .......................................... 11     performance .........................7, 21
God-enabled                                               full-fledged ........................ 24
    legalism.............................. 28         performatist ..........................7, 35
    performance ....................... 28                definition .............................. 1
Gospel of John ......................... 20           principlism ............................... 38
holy and blameless .................. 48              profit nothing ........................... 25
homosexuality........ 13, 33, 34, 36                  proveitists ................................. 22
hyper-grace ........................ 38, 40               definition .............................. 9
hyper-legalism ........................... 3          race ........................................... 30
inconsistency ..................... 31, 32            reference................................... 20
inherit the kingdom ................. 25              regret ........................................ 39
intention ................................... 20      relationship............................... 38
Judgment Seat of Christ .......... 16                 repent.......................................... 6
justification .............................. 44       repentance ................................ 21
Lake of Fire ............................. 43         rewards ..................................... 36
lazy Christian ........................... 18         sanctification ............................ 48
legalism...................................... 2          misthological...................... 48
    God-enabled ...................... 28             securitist
legalist ........................................ 6       definition ............................ 10
litmus test ................................. 22      separation ................................. 40
Lord and Master ...................... 24             severed from Christ.................. 25
Lordship ................................... 17       soteriology
Lordship Salvationist ............... 11                  definition ............................ 42
    definition.............................. 7        Spirit-Filled Life ......6, 7, 8, 9, 43
lukewarm ................................... 2        symbols
Maricon .................................... 38           3a.................................... 44
misthological
    death................................... 38
                                                          4a... ................................ 44
                                                      talents ....................................... 17
    justification ........................ 44
                                                      threshold................................... 43
    sanctification...................... 48
                                                      ultra-dispensationalists ............ 45
    sinlessness.......................... 48
                                                      wash away sins ........................ 45
misthology ............................... 36
                                                      weeping in Heaven .................. 18
NOSAS .................................. 8, 9
                                                      works ........................................ 16
OSAS ................................... 8, 10



                                       Scripture Index
Lev 20:13 ................................. 34        Mt 25:14-30 .......................16, 17
Ps 127:1 ................................... 25       Mt 25:46 ................................... 41
Prov 16:2.................................. 20        Mk 10:17 .................................. 41
Is 64:6 ...................................... 24     Mk 10:30 .................................. 41
Mt 7:14 .............................. 41, 44         Lk 10:25 ................................... 41
Mt 19:16 .................................. 41        Lk 18:18 ................................... 41
Mt 19:29 .................................. 41        Lk 18:30 ................................... 41
Indexes                                                                              Page 55
Jn 3:15-16 ................................ 41     Gal 5:4 ............................... 25, 47
Jn 3:16 ................... 10, 21, 22, 23         Gal 5:19-21 .............................. 34
Jn 3:36 ..................................... 41   Gal 5:19-23 .............................. 43
Jn 4:10 ..................................... 41   Gal 5:21 ................................... 25
Jn 4:14 ..................................... 41   Gal 5:22-23 ........................ 25, 51
Jn 5:24 ............................... 21, 41     Gal 6:8 ..................................... 41
Jn 6:40 ..................................... 41   Eph 1:4 ..................................... 48
Jn 6:47 ............................... 21, 41     Eph 1:7 ..................................... 24
Jn 6:54 ............................... 41, 44     Eph 1:13 ................................... 51
Jn 6:58 ..................................... 41   Eph 1:14 ................................... 24
Jn 6:68 ............................... 41, 44     Eph 2:8-9 ................................. 15
Jn 10:10 ................. 41, 42, 44, 51          Eph 4:26 ................................... 46
Jn 10:10b ................................. 41     Eph 4:30 ............................. 47, 51
Jn 10:28 ................................... 41    Eph 5:4-5 ................................. 34
Jn 12:25 ................................... 41    Eph 5:27 ................................... 48
Jn 20:30-31 .............................. 21      Col 1:14 ................................... 24
Acts 2:37-38 ............................ 45       Col 1:22-23 .............................. 48
Acts 2:38.................................. 46     Col 1:29 ................................... 25
Acts 9:17-18 ............................ 45       Col 3:23-25 .............................. 25
Acts 15:39................................ 39      1Thess 5:22-24 ........................ 46
Acts 16:31................................ 35      1Thess 5:23 .............................. 41
Acts 22:16................................ 45      1Tim 1:8-10 ............................. 38
Rom 2:7 ................................... 41     1Tim 1:16 ................................ 41
Rom 3:24 ................................. 15      1Tim 6:12 ................................ 41
Rom 3:28 ................................. 15      2Tim 2:12 ................................ 25
Rom 5:18 ................................. 41      2Tim 2:20-21 ........................... 48
Rom 5:21 ................................. 41      2Tim 3:6 .................................. 46
Rom 6:22 ................................. 41      2Tim 3:11 ................................ 46
Rom 6:23 ........................... 15, 41        2Tim 3:16-17 ........................... 38
Rom 8:2 ................................... 38     2Tim 4:7-8 ............................... 40
Rom 11:6 ................................. 15      Tit 1:2....................................... 41
Rom 11:22 ............................... 47       Tit 3:7....................................... 41
Rom 14:23 ............................... 46       Heb 4:12................................... 20
1Cor 3:1-3............................ 2, 49       Heb 10:10-18 ........................... 48
1Cor 3:11-15 ..................... 16, 17          Heb 12:1................................... 30
1Cor 3:15 ................................. 17     Heb 13:5................................... 51
1Cor 4:5 ................................... 20    Jam 1:12 ................................... 41
1Cor 6:9-10.............................. 34       Jam 2:24 ................................... 44
1Cor 6:20 ................................. 24     1Pet 3:7 .................................... 41
1Cor 7:3 ................................... 24    2Pet 1:5-11 ............................... 43
1Cor 8:12 ................................. 46     2Pet 1:11 .................................. 51
1Cor 10:11 ............................... 38      1Jn 1:5-10 ................................ 38
1Cor 15:34 ............................... 46      1Jn 5:11.................................... 41
2Cor 1:22 ................................. 51     1Jn 5:13.................................... 41
2Cor 5:10 ................................. 16     Rev 2:7 ..................................... 41
2Cor 5:20-6:1 .......................... 37        Rev 2:10-11 ............................. 41
2Cor 6:14-18 ........................... 47        Rev 7:17 ................................... 41
2Cor 12:21-2Cor 13:2 ............. 46              Rev 20:14-15 ........................... 43
Gal 1:8-9 .................................. 27    Rev 22:14 ................................. 41
Gal 5:2 ..................................... 25
