                                                          Anaphoric Faith
                                                            Revised 7/31/2007
                                                The Sunday afternoon in which I was preparing this anaphoric presentation for my
                                          church regarding Jam 2:14 (see yellow highlight below), I was considering using a dead
                                          bird to illustrate dead faith as something which was once alive but now is dead. I decided
                                          against it since I did not have a picture of a dead bird. Within moments of deciding not
                                          to use the illustration, I heard a bang at the door. I opened the door to find a dead bird in
                                          my dog’s food bowl! Needless to say, I went ahead and used the illustration that night!
                                                The Lordship Salvationist interpretation of Jam 2:14, and the passage as a whole, is
                                          highly dependent upon affirming the anaphoric interpretation. Free Grace Salvationists,
                                          however, need not deny the anaphoric approach to the passage. The FG position is
                                          demonstrable regardless as to whether or not the anaphoric interpretation is true or false.
                                          The references to faith in the section by James’ hypothetical opponent below have not
                                          been highlighted in color as belonging to one of the three types of faith affirmed by
                                          James himself since these references to faith appear to serve a different literary purpose.
Rich faith saves the believer from merciless judgment at the bema and qualifies him to inherit the kingdom.
Simple faith simply saves the believer from hell and qualifies him to enter the kingdom.
Dead faith does not save the believer from a merciless judgment at the bema or qualify him to inherit the kingdom.

                                                            Broad Context
1:17
    Every good thing bestowed and every perfect gift is from above (anothen), coming down from the Father of lights, with
whom there is no variation, or shifting shadow. 18 In the exercise of His will He gave birth (apokueo) to us by the word of truth,
so that we might be, as it were, the first fruits among His creatures….2:5 Listen, my beloved brethren: did not God choose the
poor of this world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which He promised to those who love Him?

                                                  Immediate Context                                                          JSC
2:12
   So speak and so act, as those who are to be judged (krino) by the law of liberty. 13 For judgment (krisis) will
be merciless to one who has shown no mercy; mercy triumphs over judgment (krisis).                                          bema


                                                            Problem
2:14
     What profit is it, my brethren, if someone says he has faith, but he has no works? Can such (he; assuming that the Greek
article is to be used anaphorically, i.e., to refer back to the previous occurrence of faith) faith save him? 15 If a brother or sister
is without clothing and in need of daily food, 16 and one of you says to them, “Go in peace, be warmed and be filled,” and yet
you do not give them what is necessary for their body, then what profit is it? 17 So also faith, if it produces no works, is dead,
being by itself.
                                                        Hypothetical Objection
2:18
     But someone will say, “You have faith, and I have works; show me your faith by (ek; MT) your works, and by my works I
will show you my faith. 19 You believe that God is one. You do well; the demons also believe, and shudder!”

                                                         James’ Response
2:20
    But are you willing to recognize, you foolish fellow, that faith without works is dead? 21 Was not Abraham our father
justified by works, when he offered up Isaac his son on the altar? 22 You see that faith was working with his works, and as a
result of the works, his faith was perfected; 23 and the Scripture was fulfilled which says, “And Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed to him as righteousness,” and he was called the friend of God. 24 You see then that a man is justified by works,
and not only (monon) justified by faith. 25 And in the same way was not Rahab the harlot also justified by works, when she
received the messengers and sent them out by another way? 26 For just as the body without the spirit is dead, so also faith
without works is dead.
                                                       Immediate Context
3:1
    Do not let many of you become teachers, my brethren, knowing that as such we will incur a stricter
                                                                                                                    JSC
judgment (krima).
                                                         Broad Context
                                                                                                                   bema
5:9
    Do not complain, brethren, against one another, that you yourselves may not be judged (krino); behold,
the Judge (krites) is standing right at the door….5:12 But above all, my brethren, do not swear, either by
heaven or by earth or with any other oath; but let your yes be yes, and your no, no; so that you may not fall
under judgment (krisis).
                                   For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                         For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                          Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2006
                                                             Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                     Abraham’s Major Life Events
                       Age        75              85             86             99          100        115?          175
                     Genesis 12:4               15:1          16:3,16       17:1,24        21:5          22          25:8
                     Event Promised           Promised        Ishmael        Isaac         Isaac       Isaac        Abraham
                             Land               Heir            Born       Promised        Born       Offered        Died

                                                            Summation
Although Paul and James both quote from Gen 15:6, Paul refers to Abraham’s initial faith (Rom 4:3) as recorded in Gen 15.
James, on the other hand, refers to the fruition of that mature faith approximately 30 years later (Jam 2:23) as expressed in Gen
22. This maturation in faith as expressed in works is necessary for the misthological salvation by faith and works to which
James refers.




                                 For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                       For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2006
                                                           Misthologist@misthology.org
