                                        Christ Hyperspaced
                                                          4/15/2016
        Paul seemingly wants believers to perceive the multidimensional “[1] breadth, and [2] length, and [3] depth, and
[4] height” of God’s love (Eph 3:18; KJV; MT). Many have anticipated that Paul is alluding to a 4D reality here. The
MT gives what appears to be the three earthly dimensions we normally perceive followed by a fourth spatial dimension,
which adds a heavenly dimension, referred to as height (hypsos—spelled with a psi that is transliterated as ps).1 In his
discussion of the 4D nature of this verse, Josh Peck thought that hypsos might be a rather direct reference to hyperspace,
speculating that hypsos served as the prefix hyper used in hyperspace because of the similarity in (hyp) spelling.2
Technically, he was mistaken in making this association, at least in this manner. Our English prefix hyper is actually
derived from the Greek preposition hyper, not from hypos. In Greek, hyper is spelled with a pi (which is transliterated
with a p). Hyper is a Greek prefix that can serve as the first part of a compound word. As a marker of spatiality, hyper
means above. Therefore, the word that Paul actually uses in Eph 3:18 (i.e., hypsos) does not mean hyperspace, at least
not for the reason Peck originally hypothesized since hyper is the actual Greek word rendered as hyper in English, not
hypsos. It would be premature, nevertheless, to dismiss Peck’s overall argument because of his transliterational error.
        For one thing, conceptually, one could argue that Paul is referring to hyperspace even though he does not use the
Greek form of hyper in Eph 3:18. According to BDAG, hypsos (1) as a dimension means height (Eph 3:18; Rev 21:16),
(2) as a place it means high place (normally Heaven, Ps 17:17; 67:19; 101:20; Lk 1:78; 24:49; Eph 4:8), and (3) as a
status it means high position (Job 5:11; Jam 1:9). I would enjoin the usage in Eph 3:18 and 4:8 so as to conclude that
Paul is talking about a heavenly place, that is, a heavenly dimension. Paul is describing this heavenly dimension as a
fourth dimension in Eph 3:18. Conceptually, Peck’s overall argument is valid even though his speculation regarding a
direct association with the Greek word hyper was in error. This heavenly dimension might be described as hyperspace,
even without a direct association with the actual word hyper. Upon initial examination I thought that my concurrence
with Peck’s argument would have to be limited to the conceptual level. However, Peck’s comment had peaked my interest
to investigate whether the Greek word hyper might ever be used in the Greek NT to described hyperspace.
        As I looked through the compound Greek words composed with hyper as a prefix (hyper-this and hyper-that), one
word stood out as a very strong candidate—hyperano.3 According to BDAG, as a place hyperano means high above. I
then observed that hyperano is equated with hypsos in Eph 4:8-10! “He ascended on high...He...ascended high above
all the heavens” (TM). In this context, as a place hyperano means a space above all the heavens. This place is a space.
One might assume that it is merely outer space. But actually, the Greek text uses a compound form of hyper to describe
this space, not a Greek word for outer.4 According to Paul this space is not merely outer space, per say, as we know it,
but hyperspace. Specifically, Paul is affirming that this hyper-place is the highest level of hyperspace! Because the place
to which Christ ascended is the highest level of hyperspace, we should deduce that Christ had to travel through lower
levels of hyperspace in order to reach this highest level of hyperspace. Spatially, one should interpret this to mean that
Christ ascended into hyperspace above all the heavens. Or, verbally, since hyperano is an adverb, one might literally
translate Paul as saying that Christ “hyperspaced above all the heavens” (Eph 4:10; TM). This word study thus confirms
my models of Heaven which picture Heaven as the other dimensional outer realm of the multiverse, reachable through
the hyperspace of the multiverse. Peck’s argument was conceptually valid but linguistically flawed. Nevertheless, his
linguistic error turned out to be minor in that he simply errored in making a direct association with hyper rather than an
indirect association. By combining the hypsos of v. 8 with hyper of v. 10, which Paul already has done, Peck’s linguistic
argument is validated. Putting the pieces together, then, Paul is saying in Eph 4:8-10 that Christ hyperspaced through
hyperspace to reach the highest level of hyperspace.
       For Peck’s discussion see: Facebook.com/IntoTheMultiverse or YouTube.com/SkyWatchTV_Official
       For my videos see: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCSHM8H_KYKv47dhSUmYGOgA
       For my video discussions concluding with multiverse see:
            o https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lyKkqJPonQs
            o https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QOUdOd-c3N4
            o Also see my forthcoming series of books: Misthological Models

1
  Because upsilon may be transliterated as either u or y, this word may also be transliterated as either hupsos or hypsos.
2
  Josh and Christina Peck, “Into the Multiverse 002: The Fourth Dimensions.” Available at https://www.youtube.com
/watch?v=P2yiS7C2bfk&list=PLJoaVZ5hNlnUsutIlyocH8pKfpskORhNu&index=7. Accessed 4/13/2016.
3
  Because upsilon may be transliterated as either u or y, this word may be transliterated as either huperano or hyperano.
4
  Hyperano is a combination of two words: hyper (high, above) + ano (up, above). The context makes it a superlative by
placing it above all the heavens. Therefore, Christ ascended to the highest hyper place, the highest level of hyperspace.

                                             Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2016
                                               Misthologist@misthology.org
