                                         Definition of Misthology
                                                          10/25/2009
        Misthology is a coined term which I (Marty Cauley) have been using for years to refer to matters
pertaining to biblical rewards. The word misthology itself is derived from the Greek word misthos (reward)
and logos (teaching). In terms of a simple definition, misthology refers to the doctrine of rewards. Something
may be described as misthological if it is a matter dealing with rewards. For example, a misthological
inheritance would be an inheritance that is considered a reward (rather than a gift), as is the case in Col 3:24.
Just as geologist refers to a scientist who is a specialist in the study of geology, so misthologist refers to
someone who has reached a certain level of biblical competency in his or her study of rewards. This does not
necessarily mean that misthologists will be in complete agreement on every area of their field of study. But
then again, one would not expect every geologist to necessarily concur with the continental drift theory
espoused by their fellow geologists either.
        Even so, an expertise in the doctrine of rewards should allow one to advance beyond the basics (such as
acknowledging that crowns are rewards) to a more mature understanding of the biblical perspective that shows
a unified perspective on certain misthological matters. I have interacted with fellow misthologists and would-
be misthologists in my forthcoming book—The Outer Darkness. For reasons explained more fully therein,
acknowledging that the outer darkness, as described in the Gospel of Matthew, is a misthological issue is
necessary to be regarded as a misthologist in the truest form of the word. To be sure, there are Free Grace
(FG) soteriologists who misperceive the outer darkness as being a soteriological issue (i.e., an issue dealing
with salvation from eternal damnation in the lake of fire). But this sad state of affairs only goes to show that
not all soteriologists make good misthologists. On the other hand, a misthologist may be reasonably expected
to be a good soteriologist. The key to being a good soteriologist is to simply recognize the unconditional
security of a believer. A misthologist cannot stop there, however. He is ever sensitive to the fact that many
texts are concerned with the conditional security of a believer. After all, the study of rewards is the study of a
believer’s conditional security pertaining to those benefits regarded as rewards. Naturally, a misthologist must
limit this conditional security to the matter of rewards. Consequently, by default the misthologist has accepted
the believer’s unconditional security in the realm of soteriology. So naturally, the misthologist is a good
soteriologist regarding this soteriological key.
        In affirming unconditional soteriological security, the misthologist makes a much stronger affirmation
of eternal security than those who merely advocate once saved always saved (OSAS). There are many
conditional securitists who affirm OSAS. A misthologist, in stark contrast, relegates the believer’s conditional
security exclusively to the misthological sphere. In this regard, a misthologist might be described as someone
who believes in an industrial strength OSAS that is not watered down with conditional security. To be sure,
there are many FG soteriologists who would likewise be able to hold to an equally strong view of
unconditional security, who would not be considered good misthologists because their sound soteriological
perspective is not balanced with an equally mature misthological understanding. Specifically, misthologists
agree that the outer darkness is a misthological matter, not a soteriological concern. FG soteriologists who do
not recognize that the outer darkness is dealing with rewards are not to be regarded as misthologists since they
have failed to follow rudimentary misthological themes to their logical conclusion in considering the outer
darkness as a picture of misthological truth.
        The fundamental axiom of misthology is simple: rewards are earned, gifts are not. This axiomatic truth
is strongly affirmed by the Free Grace (FG) camp, as exemplified by Grace Evangelical Society (GES). As
misthologists study the dynamics between rewards and gifts, it becomes increasingly clear that the eternal
security of the believer must be affirmed since the gift of eternal life is not a reward at the soteric level (dealing
with salvation from eternal damnation in hell). The basic possession of eternal life is a free gift (in both its
reception and retention). Eternal life, at this level, is freely bestowed on the believer at the moment he believes
in Christ alone for eternal life. So-called Lordship Salvationists are nothing more than conditional
soteriological securitists who make the basic possession of eternal life (in either its soteric reception or
retention) contingent on one’s performance. Contrastively, a misthologist is someone who acknowledges the
believer’s unconditional security in the soteriological sphere and who limits conditional security to the
misthological orb. Submission to the Lordship of Christ in the area of one’s performance (in terms of
theological necessity) is explicitly limited by misthologists to the misthological realm. Misthology is,
                                                                                                                 2


therefore, the study of the believer’s security which (1) affirms his unconditional security soteriologically but
(2) emphasizes his conditional security misthologically.
         Lest there be a misperception as to what constitutes being a believer, let a believer be defined simply
as someone who has believed in Christ alone for the free gift of eternal life. By choice of verb tense, this
definition purposefully rules out the need for perseverance in faith in order to be regarded as a believer.
Perseverance in faith is a misthological issue, not a soteriological necessity. Additionally, this definition as to
what constitutes being a believer implicitly affirms the necessity of assurance. Since one cannot believe in
Christ for eternal life and yet not believe that one has eternal life as a result, assurance of one’s own eternal
security at the moment of saving faith is a given necessity. At the moment of coming to saving faith, a person
must come into the realization that he has received a quality and quantity of life that assures him that he will
live with God forever. Better soteriologists acknowledge this fact, and we do not hesitate to institute this
perspective as fundamental as to what it means to be misthological in one’s orientation.
        While many excellent soteriologists will further demand that this degree of assurance be absolute to
constitute saving faith, the misthologist may insist instead that degrees of faith are misthological issues rather
than soteriological concerns. A misthologist, then, is someone who has studied rewards with enough
consistency to come to the conclusion that assurance of one’s eternal security is a given within the
soteriological realm, but a misthologist may not necessarily agree with his soteriological counterparts that a
perfect assurance necessarily falls within the soteric realm and may prefer instead to relegate that degree of
assurance to the misthological sphere to be evaluated at the Judgment Seat of Christ for potential reward.
        Granted, the Bible teaches both temporal and eschatological rewards. But just as the focus of the NT
shifts to eschatological rewards, so misthology is more concerned with teleological than temporal rewards.
Most misthologists would affirm that rewards are eternal. Granted, there are some kingdom exclusionists who
believe otherwise. More popularly known as millennial exclusionists, some within their ranks would argue that
the biblical discussion of rewards is limited to the millennium. Naturally, their approach practically requires a
premillennial approach to eschatology since they believe that at the beginning of the millennium some
believers are excluded from the millennial kingdom, but at the end of the millennial kingdom these believers
are then allowed into the eternal kingdom. Quite possibly, the greatest weakness of this millennial-exclusion
approach is in trying to limit the biblical presentation of rewards to the millennial kingdom. To the credit of
some millennial exclusionists, they acknowledge that rewards are eternal and try to find ways to maneuver
around the obvious difficulty this admission poses to their misthology. We will consider it the mark of a good
misthologist to acknowledge that rewards are eternal. Accordingly, a recompense is not considered an
eschatological reward merely because it is in the future or given at the end of the age but because that reward is
eternal. Along these lines, the definition of misthology may further be refined as the study of biblical rewards
which focuses primarily on eternal rewards.
        Since rewards are eternal, a sharp distinction between millennial and eternal rewards is unlikely. We
would expect, rather, that rewards dispensed in the millennial age will carry over into the eternal state. As a
result, a sharp distinction between the millennial and eternal nature of these future rewards would be the
exception rather than the rule in misthology. Therefore, even though a premillennial approach is frequently
preferred by misthologists in general and perhaps necessary for certain misthologists in particular, it would be
possible, theoretically at least, for those outside the premillennial camp to concur with the most distinctive
findings of premillennial misthologists in that even an amillennialists could hypothetically affirm
unconditional security soteriologically and regard the outer darkness to be a misthological matter.
Consequently, premillennial eschatology will not necessarily be considered decisive in determining if someone
qualifies as a misthologist.
        In summary, misthology is a systematic study of the biblical doctrine of rewards with a focus on the
eschatological dimension of those rewards as being eternal. Since these benefits are rewards, they are
conditional and forfeitable. Since the free gift of eternal life is not a reward, misthology affirms the
unconditional security of the believer regarding regeneration. Therefore, at the soteriological level, misthology
affirms the unconditional security of the believer. Misthology itself, however, is the study of a believer’s
conditional security. By the very nature of the case, this misthological insecurity must logically be limited to
the topic of rewards.
        Conditional soteriological securitists do not make for consistent misthologists and are thereby excluded
from being regarded as misthologists because of the axiomatical failure of exclusively conditional securitists in
                                 For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                  Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                    Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                                3


subscribing to what it means to be a misthologist. By the same token, securitists who fail to note the
misthological nature of the outer darkness are disqualified from being regarded as misthologists because they
have failed to deduce the axiomatical implications regarding this vivid misthological doctrine. Nevertheless,
one’s eschatology is not necessarily considered decisive in and of itself in determining whether or not one
qualifies as a misthologist. Thus, in a nutshell, misthology is the study of believers’ eternal rewards which
affirms that the outer darkness is one such reward (albeit a negative one) and which thereby concludes that the
outer darkness cannot be associated with suffering eternal damnation since believers are unconditionally secure
from the lake of fire. To put it as succinctly as possible, misthology is the study of eternal rewards which
affirms the believer’s unconditional security from eternal damnation but which at the same time
emphatically asserts the believer’s conditional security from the outer darkness.
        It might be mistakenly thought that this truth concerning the outer darkness is the apex of misthology. It
is not. Acknowledging that the outer darkness is a misthological theme is but an intermediate stage in the study
of rewards. One must simply be able to trace and interlace the misthological strands in the Bible to only an
intermediate level to reach a misthological perception of the outer darkness that entitles one to be considered a
misthologist. But beyond this initiatory level into the ranks of misthology, one encounters various
misthological specialists such as Gehenna Misthologists who have moved beyond recognizing that the outer
darkness is dealing with rewards to conclude that unfaithful believers are thrown into Gehenna during the
millennium. If fact, some Gehenna Misthologists believe the outer darkness is Gehenna.
        Other misthologists, such as myself, do not share this speculation concerning Gehenna and believe the
outer darkness is spatially located within the kingdom. Regardless, it is not necessary to be a Gehenna
Misthologist in order to be a Bridal Misthologist (a misthological specialist who believes that those believers
thrown into the outer darkness will not compose the Bride of Christ). Those misthologists adopting this point
of view may point out to their friends in the Gehenna camp that since rewards are eternal from the majority
perspective of misthologists, even if Gehenna has misthological possibilities, Gehenna misthology is but an
unnecessary and a passing phase to acknowledging the ultimate lasting reality—Bridal Misthology. Therefore,
those misthologists who are able to leave the hermeneutical base camp of the outer darkness and scale to more
lofty heights might think that they have reached the summit when they reach the plateau of Bridal Misthology.
I would urge my fellow Bridal Misthologists to traverse that terrain as I have done in the Outer Darkness and
find the pinnacle of misthology in Misthopology.




                                 For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                  Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                    Misthologist@misthology.org
