Extract from Enoch Pertaining to the Fall of the Watchers
                                                      8/6/2016

                                                           Ch. 6
 6.1 And it came to pass in those days that the children of men increased and fair and beautiful daughters were
 born to them. [cp. Gen 6:1-4]
 6.2 And the angels, the sons of Heaven, saw them and lusted after them. And they said to one another:
 "Come, let us choose for ourselves wives, from the children of men, and let us beget, for ourselves, children."
 6.3 And Semyaza, who was their leader, said to them:
       "I fear that you may not wish this deed to be done and that I alone will pay for this great sin."
 6.4 And they all answered him, and said:
       "Let us all swear an oath, and bind one-another with curses, so not to alter this plan, but to carry out this
plan effectively."
 6.5 Then they all swore together and all bound one another with curses to it.
 6.6 And they were, in all, two hundred and they came down on Ardis, which is the summit of Mount
 Hermon. And they called the mountain Hermon because on it they swore and bound one another with
 curses.
 6.7 And these are the names of their leaders:
       Semyaza, who was their leader, Urakiba, Ramiel, Kokabiel, Tamiel, Ramiel, Daniel, Ezeqiel, Baraqiel,
Asael, Armaros, Ananel, Zaqiel, Samsiel, Satael, Turiel, Yomiel, Araziel.
 6.8 These are the leaders of the two hundred angels and of all the others with them.
                                                           Ch. 7
 7.1 And they took wives for themselves and everyone chose for himself one each. And they began to go into
 them and mated with them. And they taught them charms and spells, and they showed them the cutting of
 roots and trees.
 7.2 And they became pregnant and bore large giants. And their height was
       40 feet tall [textual corruption, cp. Og, a post-flood giant, who was 13 feet tall].
 7.3 These devoured all the toil of men; until men were unable to sustain them.
 7.4 And the giants turned against them in order to devour men.
 7.5 And they began to sin against birds, and against animals, and against reptiles, and against fish, and they
 devoured one another's flesh, and drank the blood from it.
 7.6 Then the Earth complained about the lawless ones.
                                                                 Ch. 8
 8.1 And Azazel taught men to make swords, and daggers, and shields, and breastplates. And he showed
 them the things after these, and the art of making them; bracelets, and ornaments, and the art of making up the
 eyes, and of beautifying the eyelids, and the most precious stones, and all kinds of colored dyes. And the
 world was changed.
 8.2 And there was great impiety, and much fornication, and they went astray, and all their ways became
 corrupt.
 8.3 Amezarak taught all those who cast spells and cut roots, Armaros the release of spells, and Baraqiel
 astrologers, and Kokabiel portents, and Tamiel taught astrology, and Asradel taught the path of the Moon.
 8.4 And at the destruction of men they cried out; and their voices reached Heaven.
                                                            Ch. 9
 9.1 And then Michael, Gabriel, Suriel and Uriel, looked down from Heaven and saw the mass of blood that
 was being shed on the earth and all the iniquity that was being done on the earth.
 9.2 And they said to one another: "Let the devastated Earth cry out with the sound of their cries, up to the
 Gate of Heaven.

                                           Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2016
                                             Misthologist@misthology.org
Extract from Enoch Pertaining to the Fall of the Watchers                                                      Page 2

 9.3 And now to you, Oh Holy Ones of Heaven, the souls of men complain, saying: "Bring our complaint
 before the Most High."
 9.4 And they said to their Lord, the King: "Lord of lords, God of gods, King of kings! Your glorious throne
 endures for all the generations of the world, and blessed and praised!
 9.5 You have made everything, and power over everything is yours. And everything is uncovered, and open,
 in front of you, and you see everything, and there is nothing that can be hidden from you.
 9.6 See then what Azazel has done; how he has taught all iniquity on the earth and revealed the eternal
 secrets that are made in Heaven.
 9.7 And Semyaza has made known spells, he to whom you gave authority to rule over those who are with
 him.
 9.8 And they went into the daughters of men together, lay with those women, became unclean, and
 revealed to them these sins.
 9.9 And the women bore giants, and thereby the whole Earth has been filled with blood and iniquity.
 9.10 And now behold the souls which have died cry out and complain unto the Gate of Heaven, and their lament
 has ascended, and they cannot go out in the face of the iniquity which is being committed on the earth.
 9.11 And you know everything, before it happens, and you know this, and what concerns each of them. But
 you say nothing to us. What ought we to do with them, about this?"
                                                            Ch. 10
 10.1 And then the Most High, the Great and Holy One, spoke and sent Arsyalalyur to the son of
 Lamech [Noah], and said to him:
 10.2 Say to him in my name; hide yourself! And reveal to him the end, which is coming, because the whole
 earth will be destroyed. A flood is about to come on all the earth; and all that is in it will be destroyed.
 10.3 And now teach him so that he may escape and his offspring may survive for the whole Earth."
 10.4 And further the Lord said to Raphael: "Bind Azazel by his hands and his feet and throw him into the
 darkness. And split open the desert, which is in Dudael, and throw him there.
 10.5 And throw on him jagged and sharp stones and cover him with darkness. And let him stay there
 forever. And cover his face so that he may not see the light.
 10.6 And so that, on the Great Day of Judgment, he may be hurled into the fire.
 10.7 And restore the Earth which the Angels have ruined. And announce the restoration of the Earth. For I
 shall restore the Earth so that not all the sons of men shall be destroyed because of the knowledge which the
 Watchers made known and taught to their sons.
 10.8 And the whole Earth has been ruined by the teaching of the works of Azazel; and against him write:
 ALL SIN."
 10.9 And the Lord said to Gabriel: “Proceed against the bastards, and the reprobates, and against the sons of
 the fornicators. And destroy the sons of the fornicators, and the sons of the Watchers, from amongst men.
 And send them out, and send them against one another, and let them destroy themselves in battle; for they will
 not have length of days.
 10.10 And they will petition you, but the petitioners will gain nothing in
       respect of them, for they hope for eternal life, but none of them will live life past five hundred years."
 10.11 And the Lord said to Michael: "Go, inform Semyaza, and the others with him, who have associated with
 the women to corrupt themselves with them in all their uncleanness.
 10.12 When all their sons kill each other, and when they see the destruction of their loved ones, bind them for
 seventy generations, under the hills of the earth, until the day of their judgment and of their consummation, until
 the judgment, which is for all eternity, is accomplished. [10 x 700 = 7000 yrs; ch. 93]
 10.13 And in those days, they will lead them to the Abyss of Fire; in torment, and in prison they will
 be shut up for all eternity.
 10.14 And then Semyaza will be burnt, and from then on destroyed with them; together they will be
 bound until the end of all generations.
Extract from Enoch Pertaining to the Fall of the Watchers                                                    Page 3

 10.15 And destroy all the souls of lust, and the sons of the Watchers, for they have wronged men.
 10.16 Destroy all wrong from the face of the Earth and every evil work will cease.
 10.17 And now all the righteous will be humble, and will live until they beget thousands. And all the days
 of their youth, and their sabbaths, they will fulfill in peace.
 10.18 And in those days the whole earth will be tilled in righteousness and all of it will be planted with
 trees; and it will be filled with blessing.
 10.19 And all the pleasant trees they will plant on it and they will plant on it vines. And the vine that is
 planted on it will produce fruit in abundance; and every seed that is sown on it, each measure will produce a
 thousand, and each measure of olives will produce ten baths of oil.
 10.20 And you cleanse the Earth from all wrong, and from all iniquity, and from all sin, and from all impiety,
 and from all the uncleanness which is brought about on the earth.
 10.21 And all the sons of men shall be righteous, and all the nations shall serve and bless me and all shall
 worship me.
 10.22 And the Earth will be cleansed from all corruption, and from all sin, and from all wrath, and from all
 torment; and I will not again send a flood upon it, for all generations, forever.
                                                            Ch. 11
 11.1 And in those days, I will open the Storehouses of Blessing, which are in Heaven, so that I may send
 them down upon the Earth, upon the work, and upon the toil, of the sons of men.
 11.2 Peace and truth will be united, for all the days of eternity, and for all the generations of eternity.
                                                          Ch. 12
 12.1 And then Enoch disappeared and none of the sons of men knew where he was hidden, where he was, or
 what had happened.
 12.2 And all his doings were with the Holy Ones, and with the Watchers, in his days.
 12.3 And I Enoch, was blessing the Great Lord and the King of Eternity. And behold, the Watchers called to
 me - Enoch the scribe - and said to me:
 12.4 Enoch, scribe of righteousness. Go and inform the Watchers of Heaven, who have left the High Heaven
 and the Holy Eternal Place, and have corrupted themselves with women, and have done as the sons of men do
 and have taken wives for themselves, and have become completely corrupt on the earth.
 12.5 They will have on Earth, neither peace, nor forgiveness of sin, for they will not rejoice in their sons.
 12.6 The slaughter of their beloved ones they will see; and over the destruction of their sons they will
 lament and petition forever. But they will have neither mercy nor peace.”
                                                        Ch. 13
 13.1 And Enoch went and said to Azazel: "You will not have peace. A severe sentence has come out
 against you that you should be bound.
 13.2 And you will have neither rest nor mercy, nor the granting of any petitions, because of the wrong
 which you have taught, and because of all the works of blasphemy and wrong and sin which you have shown
 to the sons of men."
 13.3 And then I went and spoke to them all together, and they were all afraid; fear and trembling seized
 them.
 13.4 And they asked me to write out for them the record of a petition, so that they might receive forgiveness,
 and to take a record of their petition up to the Lord in Heaven.
 13.5 For they were not able, from then on, to speak, and they did not raise their eyes to Heaven, out of
 shame for the sins, for which they had been condemned.
 13.6 And then I wrote out the record of their petition, and their supplication in regard to their spirits, and the
 deeds of each one of them, and in regard to what they asked; that they should obtain absolution and forbearance.
 13.7 And I went and sat down by the waters of Dan, in Dan, which is southwest of Hermon; and I read out the
 record of their petition, until I fell asleep.
Extract from Enoch Pertaining to the Fall of the Watchers                                                     Page 4

 13.8 And behold a dream came to me, and visions fell upon me, and I saw a vision of wrath; that I should
 speak to the sons of Heaven and reprove them.
 13.9 And I woke up and went to them, and they were all sitting gathered together as they mourned, in
 Ubelseyael, which is between Lebanon and Senir, with their faces covered.
 13.10 And I spoke in front of them all; the visions that I had seen in my sleep, and I began to speak these
 words to reprove the Watchers of Heaven.
                                                           Ch. 14
 14.1 This book is the word of righteousness, and of reproof, for the e t e r n a l Watchers; as commanded by the
 Holy and Great One in that vision.
 14.2 saw in my sleep what I will now tell, with the tongue of flesh, and with my breath, which the Great
 One has given men in the mouth, so that they might speak with it, and understand with the heart.
 14.3 As He has created, and appointed, men to understand the word of knowledge, so He created and
 appointed me to reprove the Watchers, the sons of Heaven.
 14.4 And I wrote out your petition, but in my vision, thus it appeared, that your petition would not be
 granted to you, for all the days of eternity; and complete judgment has been decreed against you, and you
 will not have peace.
 14.5 And from now on, you will not ascend into Heaven, for all eternity, and it has been decreed that you
 will be bound on Earth for all the days of eternity.
 14.6 And before this, you will have seen the destruction of your beloved sons, and you will not be able to
 enjoy them, but they will fall before you by the sword.
 14.7 And your petition will not be granted in respect of them or in respect of yourselves. And while you
 weep and supplicate you do not speak a single word from the writings which I have written....
                                                           Ch. 15
 15.1 And He answered me, and said to me with His voice: "Hear! Do not be afraid, Enoch, you righteous
 man, and scribe of righteousness. Come here and hear my voice.
 15.2 And go say to the Watchers of Heaven, who sent you to petition on their behalf: You ought to petition
 on behalf of men, not men on behalf of you.
 15.3 Why have you left the High, Holy and Eternal Heaven, and lain with women, and become unclean with
 the daughters of men, and taken wives for yourselves, and done as the sons of the earth, and begotten giant
 sons?
 15.4 And you were spiritual, Holy, living an eternal life, but you became unclean upon the women, and begot
 children through the blood of flesh, and lusted after the blood of men, and produced flesh and blood, as they do,
 who die and are destroyed.
 15.5 And for this reason I give men wives; so that they might sow seed in them, and so that children might
 be born by them, so that deeds might be done on the Earth.
 15.6 But you, formerly, were spiritual, living an eternal, immortal life, for all the generations of the world.
 15.7 For this reason I did not arrange wives for you; because the dwelling of the spiritual ones is in Heaven.
 15.8 And now, the giants who were born from body and flesh will be called Evil Spirits on the Earth, and on
 the Earth will be their dwelling.
 15.9 And evil spirits came out from their flesh, because from above they were created, from the Holy
 Watchers was their origin and first foundation. Evil spirits they will be on Earth and ‘Spirits of the Evil Ones’
 they will be called.
 15.10 And the dwelling of the Spirits of Heaven is Heaven, but the dwelling of the spirits of the Earth, who
 were born on the Earth, is Earth.
 15.11 And the spirits of the giants do wrong, are corrupt, attack, fight, break on the Earth, and cause sorrow.
 And they eat no food, do not thirst, and are not observed.
 15.12 And these spirits will rise against the sons of men, and against the women, because they came out of
 them during the days of slaughter and destruction.
Extract from Enoch Pertaining to the Fall of the Watchers                                                      Page 5

 16.1 And the death of the giants, wherever the spirits have gone out from their bodies, their flesh will be
 destroyed, before the Judgment. Thus they will be destroyed until the Day of the Great Consummation is
 accomplished, upon the Great Age, upon the Watchers and the impious ones."
 16.2 And now to the Watchers, who sent you to petition on their behalf, who were formerly in Heaven:
 16.3 You were in Heaven but its secrets had not yet been revealed to you; and a worthless mystery you
 knew. This you made known to women, in the hardness of your hearts. And through this mystery the women
 and the men cause evil to increase on the Earth."
 16.4 Say to them therefore: "You will not have peace."
