                                   Forms of Enabling Grace
                                                     Revised 8/2/2016
         In my writings I have discussed various forms of enabling grace. This short article will serve as a pictorial
summation of two spheres of enabling grace: one preconversional, the other postconversional. Common grace is common
(i.e., shared) by both spheres of grace. To build our spheres, we will first need to define our terms.
Definitions
        Common Grace is the universal enablement of God that enables human beings to exercise good will toward one
another and perform socially good works. Its positive influence restrains evil and upholds civil justice. This universal
level of grace is insufficient so as to enable the lost sinner to respond savingly toward God, much less to seek God or
have stirring of good will toward God.
        Prevenient Grace is a higher form of enabling grace wherein God may give special revelation with the explicit
message of salvation that is sufficient for salvation. However, this general external draw effected by the explicit word of
God is insufficient apart from the internal, cooperative, effective drawing of the Holy Spirit. One must have both in order
to savingly believe the gospel.
        Common-Prevenient Grace is the overlapping, intermediate form of enabling grace, bridging the gap between
common grace and prevenient grace. Hence, it is appropriately called common-prevenient grace. It is a universal call to
fallen humanity that begins as the individual’s first stirring of good toward God in response to an internal, effective,
general, supernatural call from God. This initiatory draw uses general revelation (i.e., nature, history, and conscience) as
its instrument and enables the lost to respond positively toward God. This general call, however, is insufficient for
salvation. If one responds to the initiatory stages of this lower form of prevenient grace, so as to begin seeking God
through enabling grace, then God may give the higher form of prevenient grace denoted in yellow.
Preconversional Grace
                                             Illustration 1. Overlapping Grace




       Let’s picture this overlap with a diagram. Blue and yellow make green, so the overlap, representing common-
prevenient grace, is color coded as green. If you prefer baseball, think of common grace as first base, common-prevenient
grace as second base, and prevenient grace as third base. The goal is to reach home base—saving grace—the grace that
qualifies you for a home in Heaven. You have to get to first, second, and third base before you can get to home base,
which is why these higher forms of grace are called prevenient, meaning that which comes before. Another way to picture
this progress would be to think of climbing a mountain or layers.
                                          Illustration 2. Levels of Preconversional Grace




                                              Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2016
                                                Misthologist@misthology.org
Forms of Enabling Grace                                                                                              Page 2
       The goal, of course, is to move up the levels of grace and not be content with the lower levels. God’s enabling
grace at one level enables us to move on to the next level. Unfortunately, some people choose not to advance on to the
next level. Some people choose not to respond to God’s draw so as to seek Him. Or some start seeking Him but then stop
doing so. They move up a level or two and then stop or even regress. In fact, one can reach the upper level, that is,
prevenient grace, and then reject this prevenient draw to saving grace and even reach a hardened state in which one could
only grope for God in the level of common-prevenient grace without hope of finding Him—that is, without being able to
ever enter (or re-enter) the level of prevenient grace. In other words, one could climb to the top level and choose not to
go on to saving grace and as a result fall back down to the lower level or even the lowest level and never be able to reach
the highest level of enabling grace in this sphere again. Therefore, it is best to move on to saving grace by simply trusting
in Jesus for eternal live and thus be assured of having a home in Heaven. Don’t put it off. One day you may find out that
you have waited too late if you keep procrastinating.
                                    Illustration 3. The Preconversional Sphere of Enabling Grace




       If at any point you ever trust in Jesus for eternal life, so as to be assured of reaching Heaven apart from any
performance on your part, then you are immediately moved from the preconversional sphere of enabling grace to the
postconversional sphere of enabling grace. You are assured of having a home in Heaven. But now God wants to enable
you to qualify for a mansion in Heaven, not merely a home in Heaven. Related statements might be made about the levels
of grace in this postconversional sphere, however.
Postconversional Grace
                                          Illustration 4. Levels of Postconversional Grace




       After you become a believer you are still a human being, of course, and thus still able to experience God’s universal
enablement that enables all human beings—unregenerate and regenerate—to do good. But now, as a believer with the
Holy Spirit residing within you, a higher form of grace is available to you, namely sanctifying grace, a grace that enables
you to live the Christian life in a way that pleases God. Just as parents delight in helping their children learn to walk, so
God delights in helping us learn how to live the Christian life. This level of grace is available to all Christians who are
trying to learn how to walk in a way that pleases their Heavenly Father. As time passes, though, parents expect and
delight in the more mature development of their children. God does also. This mature level of sanctifying grace is,
unfortunately, not experienced by all believers. Time, desire, effort, obedience, Bible study, prayer, and Christian
fellowship, among other things, are required to mature. But the rewards are worth it. Regrettably, some believers
disqualify themselves from such rewards. They may reach the upper level but then fall back to the lower or lowest level.
Nonetheless, they cannot leave this postconversional sphere of soteriological grace.
Forms of Enabling Grace                                                                                                Page 3
                                   Illustration 5. The Postconversional Sphere of Enabling Grace




       We can retrogress to the previous levels in this sphere, but we cannot retrogress from this sphere to the previous
sphere. Having a mansion in Heaven is what is at stake in the postconversional sphere. All believers will have a home in
Heaven, but not all believers will have a mansion in Heaven. Misthological grace is the goal for this sphere. This grace
pertains to rewards in Heaven. We should want to please God so that He will be pleased with us and say, “Well done.”
So do well.
Preconversional and Postconversional Repentance
        Three texts regarding repentance will suffice to illustrate these principles in regard to preconversional and
postconversional grace. As Laurence Vance points out in his book, The Other Side of Calvinism (pp. 513-515), Calvinists
are fond of claiming that repentance is a gift because it is given by God (Acts 5:31; 11:18; 2Tim 2:25). But their position
is refuted logically, lexically, exegetically, morally, and contextually.
        Logically, we would deduce that if repentance is a gift, then we have a choice as to whether or not to receive it. If
so, then repentance is not given by means of irresistible grace but by enabling grace. God gives us the ability and
opportunity to repent. Theses abilities and opportunities are not gifts but gracious enablements. Biblical confirmation of
this logical intuition is easily demonstrated in Rom 2:4-5, where we find that God’s kindness leads us to repentance; it
does not drag us irresistibly to repentance. The context shows that we may stubbornly refuse to repent despite God’s kind
leading to repentance. God’s gracious kindness makes repentance desirable, not inevitable. This argument demonstrates
the logical and biblical fallacy of the Calvinistic position regarding the initial drawing toward repentance. The draw is
not irresistible but enabling. Thus neither being led to repentance nor the initial granting of repentance are a gift.
        For that matter, continuation of the opportunity or ability to repent is not a gift either. According to the Bible, the
gifts of God ware irrevocable (Rom 11:29). But the ability or opportunity to repent, so as to obtain the desired outcome,
is certainly revocable. For instance, the nation of Israel tried to repent after they had sinned at Kadesh Barnea, but they
were told that they could not enter the Promised Land. Even so, they repented and attempted go in and take the land, but
their attempted repentance was too late. This repentance was not God-given but self-induced, or at best it was not a God-
given repentance at the third level, the level that would have been necessary to obtain the desired outcome. God already
had sworn that they would not be able to enter His rest in the Promised Land (Num 14:1-45; Heb 3:16-19). Esau is
another example of someone who repented but at a level too low to obtain the outcome he desired (Heb 12:16-17).
Believers today can be examples of such inability as well (2Tim 2:25; Heb 6:4-6; 2Pet 2:20-22). From such examples, it
is obvious that the opportunities that God gives us to repent are not expressions of His irresistible drawing; rather, they
are manifestations of His gracious enabling which may be withdrawn.
        Lexically, we know that just because something is given does not mean that it is a gift. Rewards are also given,
for example. Didomi is the Greek word used for grant in Acts 5:31; 11:18; and 2Tim 2:25. To be sure, the word can be
used in reference to giving a gift (e.g., Jn 4:10; Acts 11:17; Eph 4:8; Rev 21:6). But it can mean to pay, to give payment,
to render in response to merit (e.g., Mt 20:4; 26:15; Lk 22:5; Rev 2:7,10,17,23,26,28; 3:21; 6:11; 11:18; 20:4). Whether
it means to give something as a gift or as a payment is determined by the context. Didomi is also used in Mt 25:15 for
the giving of talents: “And to one he gave [didomi] five talents, to another, two, and to another, one, each according to
his own ability; and he went on his journey” (Mt 25:15). What he gave were opportunities to serve according to one’s
ability. These talents are not irrevocable; thus they are not gifts (cp. Rom 11:29). God rewards us for how we use what
He has given us. He is not rewarding us for His gifts, but for our work.
Forms of Enabling Grace                                                                                                 Page 4
        Exegetically, we know that God gives us the ability to believe but also to suffer (Phil 1:29). Suffering is given but
requires our cooperation. If we suffer with Him, we will reign with Him (2Tim 2:12). Rulership is a reward given to
those believers who choose to suffer with Christ. Suffering with Christ is not a gift but a work for which we are rewarded.
What is given is not a gift but the ability and opportunity to earn a reward. But not all believers choose to suffer with
Christ. Some choose to deny Him instead, as the second half of the verse goes on to suggest.
        Morally, Calvinists do a grave injustice when they picture God as limiting the possibility of repenting to the elect.
Seemingly, the Calvinistic God roles the heavenly dice and elects to give the abilities to repent and believe the gospel to
a select few. The rest never had a chance to repent or believe; nevertheless, God condemns them for not repenting or
believing. This would be like criticizing a paralytic in a wheelchair for not walking. Never mind that the paralytic is
paralyzed from the waist down. Picturing God in such terms is morally reprehensible. The Calvinistic position is
indefensible.
        Contextually, the Calvinistic argument fails badly. As to the first of the three texts that Calvinists cite in this
capacity, consider the context in which Peter and the apostles spoke these words: “He is the one whom God exalted to
His right hand as a Prince and a Savior, to grant repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins” (Act 5:31). Both John
the Baptist and Jesus came preaching repentance to Israel. As a result, Israel had the opportunity to repent. Did Israel
repent? As Vance points out, all the Jews did not repent. Thus this call to repentance was not irresistible. By and large,
the people of Israel did not repent. Most of Israel failed to repent even though the opportunity to repent was granted to
Israel as a whole. In fact, on the occasion that Peter spoke these words, the Jewish leaders wanted to kill him.
Nevertheless, they had been granted the opportunity to repent, though they refused to do so.
        This granting of repentance to Israel cannot be limited to spiritual Israel because it is juxtaposed in the context of
the book of Acts with the second Calvinistic proof text: “Well then, God has granted to the Gentiles also the repentance
that leads to life” (Acts 11:18). The point is that just as God had given the nation of Israel the opportunity to repent, He
was now giving those who were not a part of the nation of Israel to repent. God has granted this opportunity both to the
Jews and Gentiles. It is given universally, in other words, not selectively or irresistibly.
        What about those Jewish leaders who heard the message of repentance and then blasphemed the Holy Spirit so as
to be guilty of an eternal sin? When they first heard the message of repentance from John and Jesus, they could have
repented. Many of them surely were at the preconversional level of common-prevenient grace. Some of them perhaps
moved to prevenient grace. But most of them refused to be persuaded. They hardened their hearts so as to attribute Jesus’
works to the devil rather than the Holy Spirit, and in doing so they reached a hardened state, where God judicially made
it impossible for them to reach or remain at the prevenient-level. At most, they could only attain the common-prevenient
level, trying to live lives in harmony with God’s revealed will, but they were incapable of reaching true harmony with
God thereafter. It is possible for a similar type of thing to happen to a believer after conversion. The last of the three texts
is such an example.
        In this third example, Paul instructs Timothy how to deal with these opposing men: “With gentleness correcting
[paideuo] those who are in opposition, if perhaps God may grant them repentance leading to the knowledge [epignosis]
of the truth, and they may come back to their senses [ananepho] and escape from the snare of the devil, having been
captured alive [zogreo] by him to do his will” (2Tim 2:25-26). Paideuo is not used of disciplining false believers.
Consequently, those in opposition to the truth in 2Tim 2:25-26 are genuine believers who have not yet come to this
mature knowledge (epignosis). Contextually, this passage refers to genuine believers, such as Hymenaeus and Philetus,
who had gone astray from the truth (2Tim 2:17-18; TM). They now need to be brought back to the truth.
        Paul had turned the theologically erring Hymenaeus “over to Satan” earlier, just like he did the morally erring
brother in 1Cor 5:5, so that God could use Satan as His whip to discipline [paideuo] Hymenaeus (1Tim 1:20). God child-
trains His children, not the devil’s children. The fact that God (as the ultimate agent) uses Satan as an intermediate means
of discipline does not mean that they are Satan’s children. When a father takes a belt to his son’s bottom, this does not
mean that the belt becomes the son’s father! Such a description could be very well descriptive of those believers who are
caught in Satan’s snare. They proceed from “bad to worse” (2Tim 3:13), a description Peter applied to believers (2Pet
2:20). They always are learning and never able to come to this mature knowledge (epignosis) of the truth (2Tim 3:7).
        Such a fate would apply more readily to believers who have committed the sin of Kadesh Barnea, than to
unbelievers who have not yet come to experience the saving knowledge of the gospel. Those believers who start off bad
may come to a worse state in which it becomes impossible for them to ever come to an experiential knowledge of what
it means to be one of God’s kingdom rulers. Paul holds out hope that maybe some of these believers had not yet committed
the sin of Kadesh Barnea but may regain their previous openness to the kingdom truth and become kingdom rulers—if
they repent (2Tim 2:25-26). But once the Kadesh-Barnea line is crossed, the level of sanctifying grace leading to
misthological grace is no longer possible. At that point, the highest level of grace left for a believer is common-sanctifying
grace.
