 Fulfilling the Law and the Prophets
                             Revised 7/5/2009

      “Do not think that I came to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I
      did not come to abolish, but to fulfill. For truly I say to you,
      until heaven and earth pass away, not the smallest letter or
      stroke shall pass away from the Law, until all is
      accomplished” (Mt 5:17-18).
                            OT is still Applicable
Blomberg, Wilkins, and Hayes (among others) acknowledge that the OT is
still normative, relevant, and valid as an expression of God’s will for
believers today. But then, Paul himself clearly indicates that this is the
case: “All Scripture [OT too] is inspired by God and profitable for teaching
for reproof, for correction for training in righteousness [even today]”
(2Tim 3:16). Paul’s NT affirmation applies to the entire OT: both its
fulfilled and unfilled portions. These commentators wisely caution against
avoiding two extremes: (1) One should not think that none of the OT
applies unless explicitly affirmed in the NT, (2) nor should one conclude
that all the OT applies unless revoked in the NT. So how does one achieve
a balance between these two extremes?
                                Principles
Expressed another way, how is the OT law applicable today? A solution is
available in affirming that the principles of the law are still in effect.
Martin states: “The principle underlying the moral laws of God is indeed
eternal.”1 Geisler and Rhodes concur that since the moral principles
reflect the nature of an unchanging God, they are still binding, but we are
not under the moral law.2 The moral principles are binding; the moral law
is not. Wilkins uses the atonement as an example: The OT commandment
to offer atoning sacrifices “is no longer legally binding as a practice.
Nevertheless, the Old Testament principle of penalty and payment for sin
remains valid.”3 “Principles of the law are valid guidelines.”4 The practice
has been modified, but the underlying principle still applies. The
application of underlying principles is called principlism. But how does
principlism work in practice?
                             Unity of the OT Law
The Westminster Confession of Faith (WCF) breaks the law up into three
parts (moral, legal, ceremonial) in order to claim that the moral parts are
still binding for the NT believer today. Martin and Hayes (along with
many others) demonstrate the unity of the law and thereby nullify attempts
to make certain parts of the law directly applicable today by means of such
artificial distinctions. Surely Jesus fulfilled both the moral and ceremonial
                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                             2

parts of the law. Jesus is not distinguishing between various parts of the
law in this passage. Morris concurs that there is “no distinction between
the ceremonial and moral law here.”5 Of course, dispensationalists are
known for insisting that the OT law is a unity and that NT believers are not
under any part of the law. Since it is a unity, if believers are not under part
of it, they are not under any of it. Schmidtbleicher suggests that the OT and
NT laws are dispensational expressions of the eternal law of God under
which humanity has lived from the beginning of time. In the chart below, I
have adapted his chart and approach.




Paul tells us that the law has been written in hearts of those who do not
have the written law (Rom 2:14). He also adds, “Where there is no law,
neither is there violation” (Rom 4:15). Are we to conclude, then, that when
Cain killed Able, Cain was not violating God’s law just because God had
not spelled it out for him: “Thou shalt not murder”? No! Cain was
violating the moral law that God had already written in his heart. Even
before that violation, Abel respected the Lord’s sacrificial law, and the
Lord respected him for doing so (Gen 4:4). Both the violation and respect
of God’s law was going on long before the Ten Commandments.

As to the continuity between the OT and NT expressions of this eternal
law, dispensationalists are criticized for saying that NT believers are not
under any of the OT law. Ultra-dispensationalists even go so far as to
claim that the four NT Gospels do not apply to church age believers
because the church did not come into existence until after the time period
covered by the Gospels. These ultra-dispensationalists lump the NT
Gospels with the OT. (Some would even lump the non-Pauline NT epistles
in this list of non-applicable NT writings.) The Gospels refute such ultra-
dispensationalistic handling of their pages, however. John, writing after the
NT church has already been established, tells unbelievers that they can find
eternal life by reading the words of Jesus contained within his Gospel (Jn

                         Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                           Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                          3

20:30-31). A verse like Jn 3:16 still applies directly today! Matthew,
writing to NT believers, tells them that the way to make disciples is by
teaching them to obey the words of Jesus contained within his Gospel. NT
believers today are to obey all that Jesus commanded His disciples during
His earthy ministry as recorded in the Gospels (Mt 28:19-2).

Going in the opposite direction, Covenant theology adopts the Reformed
statement, as expressed in WCF, and brings over the Ten Commandments
(minus the fourth one regarding Sabbath worship) to the NT period and
places Christians under this part of the Mosaic law, despite the NT
insistence that NT believers are not under the OT law. Adventists err even
more by bringing over all Ten Commandments plus the dietary
regulations, despite the fact that Jesus simultaneously nullified both their
dietary error and ultra-dispensationalism in Mk 7:19 when “He declared all
foods clean.” There is no way an ultra-dispensationalist can make that part
of the OT! Neither can the OT dietary regulations be brought over by
Adventists from the OT and be made directly applicable today when they
have to pole vault over such a statement to do so. In an even greater
blunder, Reconstructionists bring over all the moral and legal laws. The
Sermon on the Mount stands at the intersection of these colliding
approaches. But if by paying attention to how the Lord handles the past,
present, and future, collisions may be avoided by following Jesus’
example.
                    Until heaven and earth pass away
Will Jesus throw away the OT when He returns? Some seem to think so.
Admittedly, Jesus does say that not the smallest letter or stroke shall pass
away from the Law until heaven and earth pass away. But heaven and
earth will not pass away when He returns. So the OT will continue at least
until then. Morris understands Jesus’ statement to mean that Scripture will
not pass away even though the physical universe will pass away. Similarly,
France believes that Scripture will endure because the phrase is idiomatic
for enduring forever. Regardless, the proper interpretation is that the
Scripture will abide forever (Ps 119:89; Is 40:8; 1Pet 1:25). The best
explanation is that the principles of the eternal law as expressed in the
Scripture will never pass away.
                        Until all is accomplished
How did Jesus fulfill the law in such a manner that it is still operative at
least until He returns and evidently throughout eternity? There are three
primary options:
     1. Jesus personally fills up, performs, carries out, completes by
         meeting the OT demands. The text may mean more than simple

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                       4

   completion by Jesus’ action, but it cannot mean less since even its
   smallest detail has eternal validity.
2. Jesus fills out the full meaning of the OT by showing forth and
   bringing out its true meaning. MacArthur acknowledges, “There is
   a sense in which Jesus did that…But that cannot be the primary
   meaning of fulfill, because that is not what the word means. It
   does not mean fill out but fill up” (bold his).6 Regardless, this full
   meaning had to await His death and resurrection and the sending
   of the Spirit, so this fulfilling extends beyond Jesus’ earthly
   ministry.
3. Jesus brings the OT to its completion.
       a. Jesus brings the OT to its intended goal, bringing its
            complete meaning to fruition. With this approach,
            Blomberg effectively incorporates option two into option
            three, observing that the need for sacrifices has already
            been “brought to complete fruition” but “in other
            instances certain requirements of the law [such as loving
            God and others] endure until Christ’s coming again.”7
            Superficially, Blomberg’s statement might be taken to
            make the present day application of the law contingent
            upon whether or not it has been fulfilled. But this would
            be a misunderstanding of Blomberg’s intent since he
            states in the preceding paragraph that all the OT remains
            normative today. As an advocate of principlism,8
            Bloomberg should probably be understood as affirming
            that the unfilled proportions of the OT await direct
            application but the fulfilled portions may only be made
            normative through indirect application. After all, unfilled
            prophesies still await literal fulfillment and therefore have
            direct application to a future age. Some dispensationalists
            even believe that OT sacrifices will be reinstated as
            memorials during the millennium. So I would qualify
            Bloomberg’s position by adding that those portions of the
            OT which still await fulfillment will have direct
            application in the day and age in which they are fulfilled.
            Even so, this direct application does not entail placing


                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                      Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                             5

   those in the future directly under the OT law. (See Then-
   Now-Then, 8).
b. Blomberg seems to err, however, when he indicates that
   the application of the law will only endure until Christ
   comes again. For one thing, as already indicated, the
   physical universe does not pass away when the Lord
   returns at the beginning of the millennium. The
   application of the law would have to extend at least until
   the end of the millennium. The fulfilling of the Prophets
   would certainly include the literal fulfillment of unfilled
   prophesies during the millennial age. Moreover, Mt 5:22
   (which is the first application that Jesus makes of what
   He is teaching in 5:17-18) finds its culmination in Jesus’
   millennial administration. Since Scripture affirms its own
   perpetuity, and since Jesus affirms Scripture, we may
   affirm the perpetuity of Scripture by Jesus’ authority.
c. Whereas Bloomberg combined the third option with the
   second one, France combines the third option with the
   first one (via v. 17): “It is, then, Jesus’ ‘fulfillment’ of
   the Old Testament which is in view here. The law
   remains valid until it reaches its intended culmination;
   this it is now doing in the ministry of Jesus. This verse
   does not state, therefore, as it is sometimes interpreted,
   that every regulation in the Old Testament law remains
   binding after the coming of Jesus. The law is unalterable,
   but that does not justify its application beyond the
   purpose for which it was intended.”9 France is correct to
   stress that Jesus is the one doing the fulfilling; however,
   in accordance with principlism, direct application of the
   OT is intended until its fulfillment. Subsequently, indirect
   application is still intended.
d. All in all, option three is preferable and should entail
   options one and two. These options are not mutually
   exclusive.




           Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
             Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                             6

                                 Principlism
Principlism is the approach adopted herein to explain the means by which
the OT principles are still applicable today. In this approach, one
determines if the OT statement still has direct application by means of a
consistent hermeneutic which simply asks, “Has the OT proposition been
fulfilled?” If not, it still has direct application in the time period it is
fulfilled. If it does not have direct application, then indirect application is
sought. The application of the moral principles may vary from one
dispensation to another, but the underlying principles are still valid. All
Scripture, even the fulfilled parts, are still useful for instruction when one
discovers and applies the underlying principles (cp. 1Cor 9:9-10; 2Tim
3:16-17).

Kuhatschek suggests a three-step, pyramidal approach.10 For sake of
simplicity, this approach will be adopted as a working model. As the level
increases, the level of the application becomes more general so that our
love for God and love for others are the two capstone principles. As one
proceeds down to the base of the pyramid, the applications become more
specific and numerous. But as will be explained subsequently, direct
application of a principle as stated in the OT to the NT era does not mean
that those in the NT era are under the OT law.




    1. Direct application: Determine what the intended application was
       in the original situation at the ground level application. Ask
       yourself: “Is the OT application repeated in the NT as being
       applicable today?” If so, then you can apply it directly to your

                         Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                           Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                            7

       current situation today. If the OT application is not repeated or if it
       is revoked, then proceed through the pyramid to discover its
       indirect application for today.11
    2. Underlying principle: If direct application is not applicable, then
       move up the pyramid to seek the underlying principle from the
       ground level (original application) by discerning the broader
       principles at the higher levels. Asking why the original application
       was made will help you move up the scale to broader principles to
       discover key elements by considering the reason for the original
       application.
    3. Derivate application: After finding the underlying principle,
       move back down the pyramid to make a specific application for
       today by asking how this principle can be applied to your specific
       situation. Use the same key elements from the original application
       as in the indirect application. In comparing key elements, avoid
       confusing these elements with variables.

                                 Adventists
As an example in distinguishing key elements from variables, Kuhatschek
notes that Paul objects that the Colossians were wrong in observing special
days (Gal 4:10). Yet Paul allows the Christians in Rome to do so (Rom
14:5-6). Why? Because the Galatians were doing so as a means to retain
justification (Gal 5:4).12 Consequently, Adventists are wrong in observing
the Sabbath because they do so for the wrong reason.13 Adventists not only
mistakenly believe that only parts of the law have been abolished,14 far
worse, they believe that obeying the moral law is necessary to retain
salvation. Adventists wrongly believe that they have successfully avoided
being charged with trying to merit salvation since (according to Martin)
they affirm that salvation gained by grace is retained by works.15

Even so, the Adventists are no worse than many Arminians (such as Guy
Duty) who uses a similar argument for gaining versus retaining salvation.
Picirilli, also an Arminian, correctly notes that such an argument does not
avoid meritorious legalism: We cannot keep our salvation by works
without conditioning our salvation on works. Even more surprisingly to
some perhaps, if Martin is correct, then Adventists are better than
MacArthur, since MacArthur makes works necessary for both gaining and
retaining salvation.16 Blomberg, a Baptist, considers heaven a reward! So
my criticism herein of Adventists is not based on a bias against them just
because they are cultists. To the contrary, this Adventist gain-by-grace-

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                            8

retain-by-works soteriology is more in line with NT soteriology than that
of many mainline Reformers and is no worse than that of many Arminians.
This acknowledgement does not make their error any less serious,
however. All these false gospels lead to hell since they condition either the
reception or retention of justification on works.
                               Then-Now-Then
In my adaptation of Kuhatschek’s pyramidal model, I have proposed that
OT prophecies which have not yet been fulfilled will be fulfilled literally
in the future. If this literal fulfillment entails a return to the sacrificial
system during the millennial kingdom, does this mean that those in the
future will be placed directly under the OT law? No. For one thing, the
nature of those sacrifices could be modified in this future dispensation so
that they are no longer reconciliatory but only commemoratory, in a
manner similar to the observance of the Lord’s Supper. Even if these
sacrifices are necessary for temporal forgiveness in the millennial kingdom
(in a manner which is somewhat analogues to 1Jn 1:9), would this mean
that those in the future are placed directly under the past moral code? No.




Suppose you were to leave your present country and move to another
country and become a citizen of that country, and you were to commit
murder in that country after moving there. Would you have violated the
law in your original country prohibiting murder? No. You would have

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                            9

violated the law in your current country prohibiting murder, not in your
original country. You would be subject to the laws of the land in the land
you now reside, not subject to the law of the land in which you had
previously resided. Your current country may impose the death penalty;
your former country cannot. You would be subject only to the penalty of
the country whose law you broke—your current country. Suppose the laws
of both countries prescribe the death penalty. You would only be guilty of
breaking the law of your current country and subject to the death penalty
under its law and by its administration. You would not be subject to the
death penalty under the law of your former country. We might say that the
prohibition against murder (as expressed by either country) is directly
applicable to you, but you are only under the law of your current country.

In the same way, the OT prohibition against murder not only applied then
but applies now also. Many have assumed that since it applies in both the
OT and NT. the prohibition against murder is part of an OT moral law that
transcends dispensational boundaries. They have chopped up the OT law
into constituent parts and tried to port what they consider the moral part
over into the current dispensation in an attempt to place believers directly
under the OT law. Their surgery has been quite messy. NT believers are no
longer under the OT law—any of it. Technically, although the same
prohibition may apply in both dispensations, the people in the new
dispensation are under a completely new law—the law of Christ (1Cor
9:21). Granted, the law from that old dispensation may apply just as
directly to NT believers as before, but it is not because they are still under
the law of that old dispensation.

Just as the prohibition against murder may apply to you in your new
country also (since it expresses an underlying principle that has identical
representation in both countries), the prohibition against murder in the OT
would apply to you even though you are a NT believer. Still, this NT
application does not place you under OT jurisdiction. The prohibition
against murder in the OT applies just as directly to believers in the OT as it
does now in the church age because this law expresses an underlying
principle that finds identical expression in both dispensations.
                                   Future
      “But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother
      shall be guilty before the court; and whoever shall say to his
      brother, 'Raca,' shall be guilty before the supreme court; and
      whoever shall say, 'You fool,' shall be guilty enough to go
      into the fiery hell” (Mt 5:22).

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                          10


Many commentators (particularly of the non-dispensational persuasion)
have failed to pay sufficient attention to the futuristic nature of Mt 5:22.
The future setting is not accidental, incidental, or merely logical. It is an
eschatological future, not merely a logical future. Jesus is describing a
future judicial system in this verse. Nevertheless, Jesus makes a present
day application beginning with the next verse (Mt 5:23ff). Principlism
applies to both the past and future. When examining a passage of Scripture
regarding the past or future, believers are not to place themselves under the
jurisdiction of that past or future administration. Rather, they are to take
the underlying moral principles in that passage of Scripture and apply it to
their current situation. They should follow Jesus’ example as exemplified
in this context by making proper, present day applications of past and
future moral codes.

This principlistic approach, therefore, does not require that the Sermon on
the Mount be placed on a pair of dispensational roller skates and shoved
off into the future, contrary to the criticism expressed by some non-
dispensationalists. As widely noted, James shows that the Sermon on the
Mount has direct application for today. But for that matter, so does Jesus.
After affirming the lasting validity of the law in Mt 5:17-18, Jesus starts
off with a prohibition against murder as His first illustration (5:21) and
demonstrates the full intent of the moral principle underlying that OT law
by showing how it will be treated during the future millennial kingdom.
Those who display a murderous attitude shall be guilty (5:22).

Next, Jesus proceeds to deal with adultery. He does not speak in futuristic
terms this time, however: “Everyone who looks on a woman to lust for her
has committed adultery with her already in his heart” (Mt 5:28). Jesus
does not say that the offender shall be guilty of committing adultery (in the
millennial kingdom). Instead, the offender is already guilty of adultery.
Likewise, when He deals with divorce, Jesus states that the one abusing the
marriage relationship commits adultery—right now in the present
dispensation (Mt 5:32). When dealing with the law of retaliation (Mt 5:38),
Jesus gives present day application also. When dealing with love (Mt
5:43), the exhortation is that we should love now. Therefore, even though
the brilliant writings of Hodges and Wilkin should be consulted for the
eschatological dimension of this passage,17 the application is by no means
limited to the future. Jesus is informing His present listeners, among other
things, as to how they can enter that future kingdom.



                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                          11

                       Entrance into the Kingdom
      For I say to you, that unless your righteousness surpasses that
      of the scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter the kingdom
      of heaven” (Mt 5:20)

Commentators are quick to point out that Pharisees of Jesus’ day were
trusting futilely in their external righteousness as their means for
justification (Lk 18:9). Yet many of these same commentators then lead
their readers astray into thinking that internal righteousness is practically
equivalent to something like a two-coupon ticket in which both faith and
works are necessary to enter the kingdom in Mt 5:20. To the contrary, the
righteousness necessary to enter the kingdom is exclusively that produced
by Jesus in His fulfilling the law. Jesus states that He is the one who
fulfills the law in 5:17: “I…fulfill.” Next, He launches an immediate attack
against any and all forms of self-righteousness as a means for entrance,
whether it is external or internal. If anyone wants to try to enter the
kingdom on the basis of his or her internal performance, then this is what
that internal performance has to look like. Men have to never look at a
woman with the intent to lust. Never, ever. If a man does so, even once,
then he is guilty of internal adultery. Adultery was a capital offense in the
OT and is punished with the Lake of Fire in the NT. Make no mistake
about it, adulterous thoughts defile a person. But for that matter, so do
murderous, lying, or unloving thoughts. Men and women alike fail to meet
such standards. No one can make it into the kingdom by seeking entrance
on the basis of his or her personal performance.

One the basis of OT standards, one would conclude that none of us are
righteous (Is 64:6). And Jesus raises those standards, rather than lowering
them, by demonstrating the underlying principles of those standards.
Gaining absolute righteousness initially as a free gift is necessary because
we certainly do not deserve it. By the same principle, none of us can retain
such righteousness by our performance. We have to be able to retain it
without having our postconversional performance brought into the picture
since our performance is flawed. Judged by an absolute standard, we are
lying, murdering, adulterers before conversion and after conversion. If we
are to be considered righteous by an absolute standard, then this
righteousness must come from another source and must not be based on
our performance.

Could the righteousness of a transformed life that God produces through
believers after their conversion be what is required for kingdom entrance?
Hardly! The level of righteousness that God produces within believers

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                          12

does not rise to sinless perfection on this side of the grave. And even if it
did, to base entrance on such postconversional performance-based
righteousness would be to make entrance into heaven a reward because it
would be based on the righteousness that we produced through God’s
enablement. Entrance would be gained by works of righteousness which
we have done—a deadly fallacy (Tit 3:5).

Jesus has plenty to say about rewards in this Sermon, even rewards that
come for being righteous externally (Mt 5:10,12) and secretly (Mt 6:1) and
thus internally (Mt 5:6). But entrance into the kingdom is not a reward;
therefore, it is not based upon our external or internal righteousness, or
upon our initial or subsequent righteousness. Admittedly, our level of
internal righteousness can surpass the level of internal righteousness
achieved by the scribes and Pharisees. So does this mean that we can
follow the example of the Pharisees and trust in ourselves that we are
righteous (Lk 18:9)? Not if we want justification (Lk 18:14). Those who
experience justification are those who come to God in an attitude of
hopelessness, not self-righteousness. By His life of obedience, Jesus
fulfilled “all righteousness” (Mt 3:15). He did not do so for Himself, but
for us. We must trust in His righteousness, not our own, in order to have
His righteousness imputed to us.




In Mt 5:20 and 7:21, Jesus is talking about a future entrance into the
kingdom—an eschatological entrance into the kingdom. Naturally, this
entrance would require final justification. Such justification would be an
eschatological justification. This justification must be granted apart from
our performance since our performance would condemn us rather than

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                         13

justify us. Further, since this justification must be retained to the end by
those who receive it in order to enter the kingdom “on that [eschatological]
day” (Mt 7:22), it must be concluded that such justification (from start to
finish) is not based on our performance. Jesus is not advising us in Lk
18:9-10 to follow the example of the publican in gaining justification and
then to turn around and follow the example of the Pharisee in retaining it!
From start to finish, this justification cannot be based on our performance.

Jesus implores the unbelievers in this mixed crowd to enter the narrow gate
that leads to inclusion in this future kingdom. He wants them to do so
without delay (Mt 7:13) so that they may enter on that day. That narrow
gate is Jesus, not performance. By entering into Jesus, believers are
imputationally clothed with His righteousness and thereby granted
entrance into this kingdom. The broad gate that leads to destruction, in
contrast, is the broad gate of human performance. Such Pharisaical
performance, even if done in the name of Jesus, is a poor substitute for
faith in Jesus and is destroyed by the demands of Jesus. Those trying to
enter the kingdom by means of their performance (Mt 7:22) are excluded
on that basis because their performance fails to meet the requirements of
the law (Mt 7:23). Indeed, any attempt to gain entrance by means of
performance is doomed to failure (Rom 3:20) so that one must be justified
by faith in Christ’s performance (Rom 3:28).

In James’ epistle, which in many ways serves almost as a commentary on
the Sermon on the Mount, James confirms that regeneration is a gift (Jam
1:17-28). Moreover, like Paul, James acknowledges that imputational
righteousness is by faith: “Abraham believed God and it was imputed to
him as righteousness” (Jam 2:23). James does not reduce retaining that the
gift of regeneration or retaining final imputational righteousness to doing
one’s best. James’ demands are absolute: “Whoever keeps the whole law
and yet stumbles in one point, he has become guilty of all” (Jam 2:20).
Those trying to get into heaven by means of their performance must be
able to keep the whole law, which is why Paul is so emphatic about the
impossibility of Christians finding final justification by means of their
performance (Gal 5:3-4). A stumble at even one point along the way would
be deadly.
                     Least and Great in the Kingdom
      Whoever then annuls one of the least of these
      commandments, and so teaches others, shall be called least in
      the kingdom of heaven; but whoever keeps and teaches them,
      he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven” (Mt 5:19).

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                          14


Porter pairs Mt 5:19 with Jam 2:20 in his list of forty-five statements from
James that find corresponding parallels in the Sermon on the Mount.18
Recognition of this paring is not unusual, but its misthological significance
is normally glossed over. Jesus is dealing with misthological ranking in the
kingdom, and James properly applies this statement to believers
concerning kingdom rewards. James does so by addressing believers and
by warning them that they will need mercy when they stand before the
Lord in judgment: “Judgment will be merciless to one who has shown no
mercy” (Jam 2:13). Paul likewise warns believers: “We must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, that each one may be recompensed for
his deeds in the body, according to what he has done, whether good or
bad” (2Cor 5:10). James and Paul are in complete agreement that believers
will be judged by their works, so good works are necessary to do well at
this judgment. James stresses that works of mercy are necessary to be
shown mercy. Jesus teaches the exact same thing: “Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall receive mercy” (Mt 5:7). Positive outcomes on the
basis of one’s works at this judgment are identified by Jesus, time and
again during the course of the Sermon on the Mount, as rewards and
treasures in heaven (Mt 5:12,46; 6:1,2,5,16,19-21).

The scope of Jesus’ concern reaches far beyond mere entrance into the
kingdom. In bringing the OT teaching to full fruition in the lives of His
followers, Jesus touches upon the fact that there will be status ranking
within that millennial kingdom. Hodges describes dispensationally what
this will look like for those living in that future age. Various
commentators, not just dispensationalists, concur that the issue is
misthological ranking in the future kingdom, not exclusion from the
kingdom.19

Baxter rightly objects to those scholars who are so infatuated with Jesus’
triple references to entering the kingdom in this Sermon (Mt 5:20; 7:13,21)
that they think that “Jesus’ main concern of the Sermon is the front-end of
the kingdom, i.e., how to get in; and this ‘entrance’ is based on good
works.” Baxter counters: “Much of Jesus’ teaching is not ‘evangelistic’ per
se, but presupposes a ‘beyond-entry-level’ discipleship.”20 Jesus is
addressing a mixed crowd that includes believers (who have already
become light by entering into a relationship with God as their Father) and
also addressing unbelievers who have not yet entered the narrow gate.

Jesus’ repeated reference to the Law and the Prophets (Mt 5:17; 7:13)
forms an inclusio for the main body of the Sermon. Since the Sermon

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                           15

includes the instructions for His disciples (the believers within the
audience) as to how they should treat others (and their rewards for doing
so), Jesus’ fulfilling the Law and the Prophets would certainly seem to
include His teaching on how His disciples should treat others and the
impact that practical righteousness would have on their corresponding
rewards. Truly, the Lord moves beyond-entry-level discipleship.

Without making either the present or future entrance a reward, however,
Jesus demonstrates the importance of His followers’ having their own
personal righteousness. A rich entrance into His kingdom will certainly
require that His followers meet His postconversional performance
requirements to the best of their God-enabled ability. Peter, who was
setting in the audience, spells out this conclusion by exhorting believers to
develop their Christian character so that they could qualify for a rich
entrance into the kingdom: “For in this way the entrance into the eternal
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ will be richly supplied to
you” (2Pet 1:11; TM). Before, during, and after the antithetical section of
His Sermon, Jesus stresses rewards. In His last antithesis, when responding
to those who claim that meeting the letter of the law regarding love is good
enough, Jesus counters by going to the spirit of the law and demanding
much more than trying to do just enough to get by: His followers have to
love even their enemies. And Jesus explains in Mt 5:48 that the reason
believers (i.e., those who already have God as their heavenly Father) need
to meet this higher standard of love is in order to have heavenly rewards:
Having God as their Heavenly Father is a gift rather than a reward, but
being treated as mature sons (Mt 5:45) with full inheritance rights by their
Heavenly Father is a reward (Mt 5:46). Immediately, upon concluding this
antithesis (which is dealing with potential rewards for believers), the Lord
commences a full blown discussion of such rewards (Mt 6:1-20). He wants
these believers to practice their righteousness privately so that by laying up
treasures for themselves in heaven they may have a reward from their
Father who is in heaven. They are to lay up treasures in heaven, not the
treasure of heaven. Heaven is not the treasure. Heaven is not the reward.
Rewards in heaven are earned by practical righteousness; entrance into
heaven is freely granted because of imputed righteousness.
                            Jacobean Parallels
Porter lists forty-five parallels between the Epistle of James and the
Sermon on the Mount. Unfortunately, Porter misaligns and misapplies
some of these parallels. No doubt, Jam 2:10 does, in fact, parallel Mt 5:19
in that both passages show that one cannot trifle with the law. (For that
matter, Mt 5:22 should have been included in Porter’s chart for the same

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                    16

reason.) However, Jam 2:10 is absolute in its demands, and Mt 5:19 is
relative in its rankings (Mt 5:22 is relative in its punishments also.) The
correspondence in Jacobean allusions to the Sermon on the Mount is not
necessarily one-to-one in that one cannot equate absolute demands with
relative results.

This concern aside, however, Porter does not prove to be a good
matchmaker when he matches such texts as: Mt 7:21/Jam 2:26 and Mt
7:21-23/Jam 1:26-27&2:14-16. He pairs Matthean soteric texts with
Jacobean mistholic texts. In doing so, Porter ends up making entrance into
heaven a reward for one’s works. Rather than equating soteric and
mistholic texts, one should consider the possibility that James’ absolute
statement has application to both soteric and mistholic texts. The law
cannot be trifled with ether in terms of what it demands for kingdom
entrance or kingdom inheritance. Better matchmaking can be achieved as
follows.

            Matthew                         James                     Comment
Whoever then annuls one of the For whoever keeps the          You cannot trifle with
least of these commandments, whole law and yet                any of the law, not even
and so teaches others, shall be stumbles in one point, he     the least commandment.
called least in the kingdom of has become guilty of all.
heaven; but whoever keeps and (Jam 2:10)
teaches them, he shall be called
great in the kingdom of heaven.
(Mt 5:19)
But I say to you that everyone For whoever keeps the          You cannot trifle with
who is angry with his brother whole law and yet               any of the law, not even
shall be guilty before the court; stumbles in one point, he   the spirit of the law or
and whoever shall say to his has become guilty of all.        one commandment of the
brother, “Raca,” shall be guilty (Jam 2:10)                   law.
before the supreme court; and
whoever shall say, “You fool,”
shall be guilty enough to go into
the fiery hell. (Mt 5:22)
For I say to you, that unless your For whoever keeps the      Absolute righteousness is
righteousness surpasses that of whole law and yet             required for entrance.
the scribes and Pharisees, you stumbles in one point, he
shall not enter the kingdom of has become guilty of all.
heaven. (Mt 5:20)                  (Jam 2:10)
21
   Not everyone who says to Me, For whoever keeps the         Absolute righteousness is
“Lord, Lord,” will enter the whole law and yet                required for entrance.
kingdom of heaven; but he who stumbles in one point, he       Those who base their
does the will of My Father who has become guilty of all.      entrance into heaven on
is in heaven. 22 Many will say (Jam 2:10)                     their submitting to God’s
to Me on that day, “Lord, Lord,                               will in terms of their

                           Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                             Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                     17

did we not prophesy in Your                                   Christian practice will be
name, and in Your name cast                                   rejected because of their
out demons, and in Your name                                  lawless practice.
perform     many      miracles?”                              Regeneration is a gift
23
   And then I will declare to                                 (Jam 1:17-18( and
them, “I never knew you; depart                               imputational righteous is
from Me, you who practice                                     by faith rather than by
lawlessness.” (Mt 7:21-23)                                    works (Jam 2:23).

When Jesus deals with those already in the millennial kingdom, He shows
that their degree of guilt will be relative (Mt 5:19, 5:22). James likewise
shows that for those already justified by faith, there will be a subsequent,
relative justification by works (Jam 2:21). They already have absolute
imputational righteousness and are thereby qualified for entrance into the
kingdom (Jam 2:23). But they will need justification by works in order to
do well at the Judgment Seat of Christ and hear the words, “Well done.”

As James surmises, “You see then that a man is justified by works, and not
only justified by faith” (Jam 2:24; TM). Two types of justification are
affirmed. Relative justification by works is the goal for those who already
have absolute justification by faith. Justification by faith grants believers
entrance into the kingdom and qualifies them to pursue justification by
works so that they may obtain rewards within the millennial kingdom.
Citizens of the kingdom are encouraged to lay up treasure in the kingdom
now that they are citizens of that kingdom. How one will be treated within
the kingdom will be dependent, to a certain extent, upon their performance
as citizens of that kingdom—how much treasure they lay up in that
kingdom for example. But entrance into the kingdom must be granted
independent of their performance since James relegates postconversional
works to misthological justification by works and affirms that imputational
righteousness is based on faith (apart from works since works pertain to a
different type of justification).
                                  Conclusion
Entrance into the kingdom is based on Jesus’ imputational righteousness.
The demands are too high for it to be anything less than His righteousness.
It will not do for Adventists or Arminians to think that they gain entrance
by faith but retain it by works or for those in the Reformed camp to argue
that they gain initial justification by faith but retain finial justification by
works. Soteric justification—all of it—is by faith apart from works (Rom
3:26). Justification for this Pauline statement in 3:26 not only goes back to
the OT (as shown in Rom 4:6) but is also logically deduced straight from
the words of Jesus in the Gospels.

                           Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                             Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                          18


Without a doubt, there is more to what Jesus is teaching in Mt 5:17-20 than
mere imputational righteousness, but there is not less. By necessity, option
one (and thus imputation by implication) is included in the third
hermeneutical option for this passage. Jesus shows what it means to meet
the OT demands, and His corresponding illustrations require that His
listeners conclude that He is the only one who can fully meet such
demands. His righteousness is the fruit demanded by OT law and provided
by Him, in compliance with OT demands, to those who believe in Him. To
believers who are already qualified for entrance into heaven because of His
imputed righteousness, Jesus promises treasure in the kingdom if they will
practice kingdom righteousness.

In the process, the Lord demonstrates hermeneutical genius, showing His
mixed group of listeners how to apply principlism—in deriving present
day application from past and future dispensations—so that they may be
qualified not only for entrance into heaven but for rewards in heaven. His
words are too full of past, present, and future dispensational truth to be
archived away on a dispensational bookshelf as being only applicable to
another age.

Surprisingly, Porter omits Jam 2:23 from his chart. But the parallel appears
to be rather obvious. In Mt 5:17, Jesus says that He came to fulfill (pleroo)
the Scripture. James says: “The Scripture was fulfilled [pleroo] which says,
‘And Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as
righteousness,’ and he was called the friend of God.” In the Sermon on the
Mount, Jesus is fulfilling the Scripture and its demands for righteousness.
He makes the righteousness necessary to enter the kingdom so high that He
is absolutely the only one who can fulfill the scriptural demands. At the
same time, He demonstrates the rewards for relative righteousness in the
lives of His followers. Wiersbe compares this fulfilling in Mt 5:17 to an
acorn seed that grows up into an oak tree.21 Righteousness is imputed,
implanted, and imparted to the believer. James urges believers to give this
implanted word a humble reception so that it can save their souls from
misthological loss (Jam 1:21). By implanting His word of righteousness in
our heart, Jesus makes the full fruition of righteousness possible in our
lives and urges us to build upon those words in order to save our lives from
ruinous results (Mt 7:24-27). The Lord wants to bring out the full fruition
of the OT demands for righteousness in the NT believer’s life as well so
that the NT believer may be called a friend of God in the kingdom of
heaven. Can being called great in the kingdom mean anything less? Is
there any greater title for which the believer could hope to aspire?

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                           19




     1
        Walter Martin, The Kingdom of the Cults (Minneapolis: Bethany
House Publishers, 1985), 484.
     2
        Norman Geisler and Ron Rhodes, When Cultists Asks: A Popular
Handbook on Cultic Ministries (Grand Rapids: Baker Books, 1997), 98.
     3
        Michael J. Wilkins, Matthew, The NIV Application Commentary:
From biblical text . . . to contemporary life, gen. ed. Terry Muck (Grand
Rapids: Zondervan, 2004), 229.
     4
        Wilkins, 236. But Wilkins (not to be confused with Bob Wilkin)
blows Mt 5:20 royally by insisting that the righteous necessary to enter
heaven is “justification (imputed righteousness) and sanctification
(imparted righteousness)”—the latter being described as inner
transformation (pp. 234-235). And he is by no means alone in this error.
Contrary to Wilkins, and those like him, our entrance into heaven is
conditioned on imputational righteousness alone.
     5
        Leon Morris, The Gospel according to Matthew (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans Publishing Co., 1992), 108.
     6
        John MacArthur, The MacArthur New Testament Commentary:
Matthew 1-7 (Moody Press, Chicago, 1985), 256.
     7
         Craig L. Blomberg, Matthew, vol. 22, The New American
Commentary: An Exegetical and Theological Exposition of Holy
Scripture, gen. ed. David S. Dockery (Nashville: Broadman Press, 1992),
104.
     8
       See Wilkins, 236, n. 21.
     9
        R. T. France, Matthew, vol. 1, The Tyndale New Testament
Commentaries, ed., R. V. G. Tasker (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing
Co., 1985).
     10
        Jack Kuhatschek, Taking the Guesswork out of Applying the Bible
(Downers Grove: InterVarsity Press, 1990), 54. This simplified version of
the principlizing approach is described more in-depth by Hayes with
additional steps. See J. Daniel Hays, “Applying the Old Testament Law
Today,” BibSac 158 (January-March, 2001): 21-35.
     11
        I would also add, “Is it prophecy that is yet to be fulfilled?” If so,
then, although the direct application awaits the future, proceed through the
pyramid to discover its indirect application for today. For example,
although Mk 13:13 is referring to being saved as a result of enduring the
future tribulation, it certainly has application for today.
     12
        Compare Kuhatschek, 75.
     13
        Although Martin demonstrates that the NT practice is to worship on
Sunday, he nevertheless makes allowances for Sabbatarians (such as

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                             20


Adventists) to worship on Saturday on the basis of Rom 14:5-6 (p. 470).
Accepting the council of Kuhatschek and Martin in regarding the day as a
variable would appear reasonable as long as the proper motive is
maintained and the Galatian error is avoided. However, since Adventists
seek to retain the justification through such observance, they fail to avoid
falling from grace into legalism with their sabbatical observance.
      14
         Geisler and Rhodes provide a very helpful illustration to explain
how “the moral principles embodied in the Commands” are “still binding
on believers today” without placing believers under the law: “The fact that
we are bound by similar moral laws against adultery, lying, stealing, and
murder no more proves we are still under the Ten Commandments than the
fact that there are similar traffic laws in North Carolina and Texas proves
that a Texan is under the laws of North Carolina” (p. 98). So how do we
reconcile this perspective with Paul who said that all the OT law has been
abolished (Eph 2:15) and Jesus who said that He did not come to abolish
the Law. Morris is correct: “Jesus firmly disclaims any intention of doing
away with any part of the Bible” (Matthew, 107-108). By fulfilling the
requirements of the law for us, Jesus not only delivered us from the direct
application of the law but also from the price of obedience soteriologically
demanded by the law. That price is no longer demanded from us—either
directly or indirectly. The law’s demand for soteric righteousness from us
has ended because it has been fulfilled for us by Christ (Rom 10:4).
      Adventists are by no means alone in thinking that the moral law
remains intact. Mainline interpreters such as MacArthur and Hendriksen
share this error with them. Hendriksen “insists that every commandment of
that [the greatest commandments] which is truly God’s moral law…must
be kept.” (italics his). William Hendriksen, Exposition of the Gospel
According Matthew, New Testament Commentary (Grand Rapids: Baker
Book House, 1973), 292. MacArthur acknowledges that Jesus has fulfilled
the moral, judicial, and ceremonial law for us. By His life, Christ fulfilled
the moral demands of the law. And by His death, He fulfilled the judicial
and sacrificial demands of the law. Yet MacArthur strangely concludes
that although the latter two ended and were set aside because they were
fulfilled, the moral law is still being fulfilled by Jesus’ disciples (pp. 257-
259). Besides being inconsistent, his distinction is artificial and superficial.
His inconsistency grows even worse, even if he is just following WCF,
when he regards keeping the Sabbath part of the moral law as part of the
law that was completed along with the judicial and ceremonial law (p.
262). How he can pick and choose what parts of the so-called moral law is
to be set aside is left a mystery. As to the part of the moral law that
MacArthur deems to still place believers under, he says it is “just as valid”

                         Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                           Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                           21


and yet “no longer binding” and calls this a “paradox” (p. 272). What
happened to Jam 2:10? MacArthur says that Christians “are no longer
under the ultimate penalty of the law.” Yet elsewhere he will conclude that
God does not keep us apart from our perseverance. (For documentation,
see my book Mere Christianity and Moral Christianity.) Such a
perspective certainly makes it sound like MacArthur regards the moral law
as soteriologically binding!
      To his credit, however, MacArthur does address Mt 5:20 very well in
his commentary by describing it exclusively as imputed righteousness.
Splendid! In defense of his treatment of this verse, I will point out although
the moral principles (rather than laws themselves) of the OT are still
applicable to us (albeit not soterically) and need to be fulfilled by us, this
pericope in Mt 5:17-20 conditions our entrance into the kingdom on our
righteousness (v. 20) as produced by Jesus’ fulfillment of the law.
Entrance is not based on our righteousness as produced by our obedience
of the law. The righteousness in view in this immediate context is
produced for us rather than by us or through us. Nor is it righteousness
displayed by us. Righteous produced by us or through us or displayed by
us results in rewards for us. Entrance is free; rewards are not. Imputed
righteousness is exclusively in view in 5:20, not imparted righteousness or
manifestative righteousness.
      15
          Martin, 485-486, 490. One cannot simply chop those 10
commandments out of the 613 commandments (from the first five books of
the Bible) and claim to have discovered applications for moral principles
that are still operable today.
      16
         For documentation, see my book Mere Christianity and Moral
Christianity.
      17
         See Zane Hodges, “Law and Grace in the Millennial Kingdom.”
Available at http://www.faithalone.org/journal/2007i/3_Hodges%20LAW
%20AND%20GRACE.pdf. Bob Wilkin, “Whoever Says ‘You Fool!’ Shall
Be in Danger of Hell Fire: Matthew 5:22.” Available at http://www.
faithalone.org/news/y1997/97sept2.html. The only modification to
Hodges’ article that I would suggest is to clarify that those in the
millennial kingdom (the future then) are not placed directly under the OT
law (back then). After all, the millennial prohibition against murder will
modify the OT Law so that it will have application to anger. This super-
strict enforcement of the in-depth implications of the OT Law would be
better considered the Millennial Law than a return to the OT Law.
      18
         Virgil V. Porter Jr., “The Sermon on the Mount in the Book of
James, Part 1,” BibSac 162:647 (July 2005), 344-360. Unfortunately, in his
second article, when discussing the mutual soteriology of the Sermon on

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                            22


the Mount (pp. 479-481), Porter appeals to adopt the popular view point
that one must have good works as the necessary and natural expression of
one’s faith in order for such faith to be saving faith. Virgil V. Porter Jr.,
“The Sermon on the Mount in the Book of James, Part 2,” BibSac 162:648
(October 2005), 470-482. Such an approach logically and tragically results
in making final soteric justification conditioned on faith and works. Porter
overlooks the mistholic nature of such salvation. Both Jesus and James are
talking about rewards as the outcome for the believers’ works! Exclusion
from the kingdom and rulership of the kingdom is based on performance.
Entrance into the kingdom is not based on works. To those (unbelievers)
who are seeking kingdom entrance by means of their performance, Jesus
says, “Depart from Me” (Mt 7:23). To those (believers) who are seeking
rewards in the kingdom by means of their performance, Jesus says,
“Blessed” (Mt 5:3-12).
      19
         For commentators affirming that the issue is kingdom ranking
rather than kingdom exclusion in Mt 5:19 see Carson, Greene, MacArthur,
Morris, Mounce, Nolland, Wilkins. Oliver B. Greene, The Gospel
According to Matthew, vol. 1, chapters 1-5 (Greenville; SC: The Gospel
Hour, 1971). Some commentators, in contrast, believe that Mt 5:19 refers
to ranking in the present kingdom. France, for example, believes that it is a
ranking of last in terms of the quality of discipleship rather than in terms of
future rewards. Blomberg also believes that it is ranking in the present
kingdom, and on the basis of Mt 20:1-16, he is doubtful that there will be
ranking in the future kingdom. See The Outer Darkness for my rebuttal to
Blomberg regarding this passage and his approach in general.
      For sake of interaction with his principle arguments against
misthological ranking in Mt 5:19 that may be gleaned from its closest
parallels, however, let it be granted for sake of argument that Jesus is
describing someone in Mt 11:11 who is presently least in the inaugurated
kingdom as having a greater privilege, rather than a greater reward than
John the Baptist: “He who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than
he.” Because John did not live to see the actual inauguration, whereas a
believer living during the inauguration would see things that John did not
see, being lesser or greater in the kingdom in Mt 11:11 would not refer to a
misthological ranking within the kingdom but to the privilege of seeing
certain events unfold. Thus, Blomberg’s interpretation of Mt 11:11 is
reasonable regarding present privilege.
      Likewise, let it be assumed that the present tense in 18:1,4 is
addressing present greatness in the kingdom, that Jesus’ mention of greater
versus lesser in regard to the kingdom is lurking in the back of the
disciples’ minds from Jesus’ earlier references in 5:19 and 11:11, and that

                         Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                           Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                         23


Jesus is addressing present greatness: “Who then is greatest in the kingdom
of heaven?....Whoever then humbles himself as this child, he is the greatest
in the kingdom of heaven.” Even so, if one is not to play favorites with the
tense, then it should be acknowledged by the same token that Jesus’ use of
the future tense in 5:19 is referring to a future greatness: “Whoever then
annuls one of the least of these commandments, and so teaches others,
shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever keeps and
teaches them, he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.” The most
natural correlation would be to associate that future greatness with
millennial status during the millennial administration described in Mt 5:22:
“But I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother shall be
guilty before the court; and whoever shall say to his brother, ‘Raca,’ shall
be guilty before the supreme court; and whoever shall say, ‘You fool,’
shall be guilty enough to go into the fiery hell.”
      Accordingly, the future tense of Mt 5:20 would be regarded as
dealing with entrance into this future kingdom (to be consistent with the
tense argument Blomberg is using): “For I say to you, that unless your
righteousness surpasses that of the scribes and Pharisees, you shall not
enter the kingdom of heaven.” Consequently, that future tense would
correspond with the misthological ranking in 5:19. The matching entrance
in Mt 18:3 would also pertain to the eschatological future: “Unless you are
converted and become like children, you shall not enter the kingdom of
heaven.”
      To correlate the present and future tenses, I propose that while the
disciples were so concerned over which of them was currently the greatest
in the kingdom and would therefore be qualified for sitting on His left and
right in the future expression of that kingdom (cp. Mt 20:21), Jesus was
concerned with the fact that some of them (e.g., Judas) had not yet even
entered the kingdom presently and therefore were disqualified for entrance
into that kingdom eschatologically. A sharp dichotomy between initial and
final entrance into the kingdom is unwarranted. Likewise, denying a
correlation between present and future ranking would be unwise. Their
concern over present status would not be mutually exclusive with their
concern over future status. Therefore, their inquiry regarding present
ranking was in anticipation of their misthological ranking. Their present
ranking would determine their future ranking and positions of rulership.
Present ranking and its corresponding future rulership is what they were
concerned about—it is what they had in mind (Lk 22:22). Even if current
ranking was not foremost on Jesus’ mind, it was foremost in their minds.
Blomberg’s theory that Mt 5:19 refers to present ranking is rendered
implausible even by his own tense argument since the most reasonable

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                          24


hypothesis is that these future tenses are allusions to the future kingdom
and that the preoccupation with current status on the part of His disciples
was in anticipation of future ranking. Jesus stresses that present greatness,
via childlike humility, is the present means (Mt 18:4) to gain this future
status they had lurking in their minds from His previous confirmation of
future kingdom ranking (Mt 5:19).
      Undoubtedly, Blomberg would reply that his argument is not only
based on the tense but the sense of the passage to which he is appealing for
confirmation in Mt 18:1-4, where he observes: “The criterion for greatness
is precisely the criterion for entrance.” Craig L. Blomberg, “Degrees of
Reward in the Kingdom of Heaven?” JETS 35:2 (June 1992), 166. Indeed,
one may strengthen his argument by augmenting it with the parallel from
Lk 18:9-14 in which Jesus again uses children to illustrate the necessity of
humility for soteric justification and entrance into the kingdom. So let us
be charitable to Blomberg and allow that the humility of childlike
dependency is necessary for both an entrance into the kingdom and for
greatness in the kingdom. Does doing so necessarily require that we follow
Blomberg’s example in equating entrance with greatness and construing
heaven to be a reward? Not logically. Not biblically.
         The Lukan parallel incorporates both soteric and mistholic themes,
but it does not necessarily equate them. To be sure, humility is necessary
not only for soteric justification but for mistholic exaltation: “I tell you,
this man went down to his house justified [soteriologically] rather than the
other; for everyone who exalts himself shall be humbled, but he who
humbles himself shall be exalted [misthologically]” (Lk 18:14). Humility
is necessary for soteric kingdom entrance: “Whoever does not receive the
kingdom of God like a child shall not enter it at all” (Lk 18:17). It is also
required for mistholic kingdom possession: “Permit the children to come to
Me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as
these” (Lk 18:16). Nevertheless, the shared necessity for humility both to
enter the kingdom and inherit the kingdom does not mean that humility is
the condition per se for entrance. Instead, humility may be a necessary
precondition for faith, and faith itself the necessary condition for kingdom
entrance (Mt 21:31-32). This distinction between precondition and
condition accords quite well with the Matthean context, which otherwise
would have one earning entrance into heaven by chopping off one’s hand
(Mt 18:8). This demarcation also accords quite well with the Lukan
context in which the rich young ruler had to sell his possessions as a
precondition for saving faith and as a condition for rewards in heaven (Lk
18:22). This distinction allows us to affirm, in contrast to Blomberg, that
we do not buy heaven.

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                            25


          The mistholic nature of humility is confirmed by Jesus: He who
humbles himself shall be exalted” (Lk 18:14). Jesus had already associated
this exaltation with table ranking and thus with kingdom status at the
wedding feast (Lk 14:8-11). Therefore, when Peter applies this principle to
believers, years later, he is not telling them how to earn kingdom entrance
but how to obtain exalted kingdom ranking: “Humble yourselves,
therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you at the
proper time” (1Pet 5:6). Humility is a virtue. We are not saved from hell
by virtue of our virtue. Therefore, we are not saved from hell by our
humility. Rather, faith is the sole condition for our salvation from hell.
Granted, even faith can be a virtue. But saving faith cannot be a virtue. See
my book, Mere Christianity and Moral Christianity. The reason saving
faith is not a virtue is because it is a passive, punctiliar persuasion and
therefore not rewardable as a work. Virtuous faith, on the other hand, is
emboldened and enlivened by works and is itself considered a work since
it is rewarded as a work. The virtue of humility is required for one to come
to saving faith, but this virtue is distinguishable from saving faith just as a
precondition is differentiable from a condition. Those, like Blomberg, who
cannot tell the difference between a precondition and a condition, end up
inadvertently teaching salvation by works. Blomberg’s attempt to make
heaven a reward that he receives because of his humility turns out to be a
claim that he will be exalted to heaven because of the virtue of his
humility. Humility has been lost when those who profess it think that they
have enough of it to justify their reaching heaven. The publican’s humility
should not be turned into Pharisaical humility. The publican humbled
himself by giving up all attempts to justify himself. He did not seek to
justify himself by virtue of his humility. Let us follow his example. If we
will do so, then not only will we qualify for kingdom entrance, but we will
also be useful for humble kingdom service that can qualify us for a high
kingdom ranking. Jesus is demonstrating that we need to be humble
presently as His disciples if we wish to obtain a high ranking in the future
kingdom.
          Like Blomberg, Lenski believes that Mt 5:19 is referring to
ranking in the present kingdom; however, in contrast to Blomberg, Lenski
at least acknowledges that there will also be similar ranking in the future
kingdom. Lenski does, nonetheless, pose an interesting dilemma. If being
least is the most that can happen to those disciples who trifle with the least
commandments, then what would happen to those disciples who set aside
the greatest commandments. In other words, if a person can be sent to hell
for just calling someone a fool in Mt 5:22, then what will be the outcome
for those believers who actually commit murder. As an advocate of

                         Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                           Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                          26


NOSAS, Lenski believes that any disciple who did so would “cease to be a
disciple and would forfeit the kingdom” (p. 211). MacArthur responds to
such type of thinking by saying, “Jesus does not refer to loss of salvation”
(p. 271). MacArthur’s statement is true but inadequate since Lenski
concurs that the present passage does not refer to the loss of salvation. The
real question is, “What would happen if a believer were to violate the
greater commandments?” Something worse than being least in the
kingdom would be required since the worse violators would have to be
punished with greater punishment than the least violators. So how could
the worse violators be made lower than the least? As advocates of OSAS,
misthologists would contend that entrance into the eternal kingdom cannot
be lost. At least two options are possible. Ultra misthologists would argue
that such believers would forfeit the millennial kingdom. On the other
hand, Bob Wilkin’s article may be consulted for a more conservative
misthological approach. I adopt and adapt Wilkin’s approach in The Outer
Darkness.
       My dispensational interpretation of Mt 5:19 leads me to suspect that
breaking the least commandments and so teaching others will be among
the greatest types of offenses that will be committed during the course of
the millennial kingdom. (The rebellion at the end of the millennial
kingdom is thus not included in this consideration.) Since the lion is to lay
down with the lamb, this kingdom is to be characterized by peace.
Proposing that its inhabitants will actually commit murder seems rather
ludicrous. Those deemed murderers during the span of this kingdom will
be those who simply express murderous emotions. They will be subject to
removal from the kingdom via capital punishment (Mt 5:22).
Alternatively, one might suggest that even if it were possible for someone
to actually commit murder during the course of this kingdom
administration, such a person would be subjected to capital punishment
and thus removed from the kingdom. (It must be remembered that those
who enter the millennial kingdom in flesh and blood bodies will still be
subject to death.) Therefore, the greatest infringement that one could
commit and still be allowed to live in the millennial kingdom would be of
the type described by Jesus in Mt 5:19 and would result in one being least
in the kingdom. Those committing greater offenses will not be allowed to
remain in the kingdom (so Mt 5:22).
       Under these circumstances, I am willing to concede to my ultraistic
friends that temporary kingdom exclusion for believers who commit
greater crimes during the course of the millennial kingdom is at least a
theoretical possibility. Even so, even Mt 5:22 indicates that such believers
would not be subject to Gehenna. As for my dispensational application to

                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                            27


the present church age, I would equate being least in the kingdom with
being cast into the outer darkness. Therefore, spatial exclusion from the
millennial kingdom is not even a remote possibility for church age
believers since they would at least still be in the kingdom. The greatest
offense that a present day believer could commit would be dealt with in
terms of kingdom status, not in terms of kingdom exclusion.
20
   Wayne Baxter, “The Narrative Setting Of The Sermon On The Mount”
TrinJ 25:1 (Spring 04), 35. Nevertheless, Baxter’s presentation is less than
stellar. He makes final (i.e., eschatological) entrance into the kingdom (Mt
7:21-23) conditioned on one’s postconversional performance and thus
relates Mt 5:20 more so to sanctification rather than to justification (p. 36).
By basing eschatological entrance into the kingdom on one’s allegiance in
following Jesus, Baxter is basing entrance on good works. Yet he denies
that the entrance is based on good works. Evidently, he does not know
what good works are—mistakenly thinking that they are only works done
“apart from Jesus” (pp. 36-37). Baxter fails to grasp the significance of
Jesus’ sermonic stress on rewards and even fails to list this mistholic
evidence in his list of reasons (on pp. 36-37) as to why it must be
concluded that Jesus is concerned with more than just entrance into the
eschatological kingdom. To set the record straight, a good work is an
action or attitude that results in a positive reward or lessens a negative
reward. Jesus is not only demonstrating that entrance into the kingdom
(and thus that final soteric justification) cannot be a reward for our
behavior; rather, He is also demonstrating that rewards in heaven are based
on our performance. The paradox as to why we cannot merit entrance into
heaven but can merit rewards in heaven is easily explained: The
righteousness which enables us to enter heaven is imputed; the
righteousness which entitles us to rewards in heaven is imparted.
21
   Warren Wiersbe, Matthew, Wiersbe’s Expository Outlines on the New
Testament, vol. 1 (Wheaton: Victor Books, 1992), 22.




                         Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                           Misthologist@misthology.org
