             GOD LOVES YOU
           AND OFFERS YOU LIFE
     But what do you have to do to receive eternal life and
live with God forever in heaven?
T Do your best?
T Be good?
T Turn from your sins?
T Obey the golden rule?
T Keep the Ten Commandments?
T Tithe to the church?
T Go to church?
T Be baptized?
T Confess Jesus publicly?
T Take up your cross and follow Jesus?
T Give your heart and life to Jesus?
T Surrender all to Jesus?
T Make Jesus Lord of your Life?
T Believe in Jesus and bear good fruit?
                Man’s Solution: Performance
     The things listed above are good things, but believing
they are even part of the reason God should let you into
heaven is a very deadly mistake. The Bible says, “There is
none righteous, not even one” (Rom 3:10). “All have
sinned and fall short of the glory of God” (Rom 3:23). All
the good things we have done are like a filthy garment in
God’s eyes because they are stained with sin (Is 64:6).
None of us are good enough to get to heaven. For example,
how many people do you have to murder to be a murderer?
Just one. How many sins do you have to commit to be a
sinner? Just one. The Bible says, “For whoever keeps the
whole law and yet stumbles in one point, he has become
guilty of all” (Jam 2:10). “Cursed is everyone who does not
abide by all things written in the book of the law, to
perform them" (Gal 3:10). We all commit numerous sins
and are cursed by our performance rather than justified by
it. Being better than someone else is not good enough. We
all fall way short of being good enough to go to heaven.
     To illustrate, suppose we were standing outside of the
Empire State Building. Could we jump to the top? No.
You might jump higher than me, or I might jump higher
than you, but neither of us would even come close to
reaching the top. Likewise, none of us can reach heaven by
being good.
     The Bible says, “Your sins have made a separation
between you and your God” (Is 59:2). “The wages of sin is
death” (Rom 6:23). “And I saw a Great White Throne…and
the dead were judged from the things which were written in
the books, according to their works…And if anyone’s name
was not found written in the book of life, then he was
                                thrown into the lake of fire”
                                (Rev 20:11-15). Spiritual
                                death is ultimately eternal
                                separation from God in hell.
Since God is holy, He must punish our sin. The way we live
and the things we do condemn us all as hell-deserving
sinners.
     But the gospel, the good news, is that God is not only a
holy God, He is also a loving God. He loves you and has
provided a way for you to be saved from hell, to have your
sins forgiven, to have eternal life, to have your name in the
book of life, and to live with Him forever in heaven.
                     God’s Solution: Jesus
     As the holy righteous judge of the universe, God
cannot ignore our sin. The death penalty had to be executed.
And it was. Jesus died in our place. According to the Bible,
“when you were dead in your transgressions…He…
canceled out the certificate of debt consisting of decrees
against us and which was hostile to us; and He has taken it
out of the way, having nailed it to the cross” (Col 3:13-14).
                       Jesus “bore our sins in His body on
                       the cross” (1Pet 2:24). “But God
                       demonstrates His own love toward us,
                       in that while we were still sinners,
                       Christ died for us.” (Rom 5:8). “He
                       was pierced through for our sins, He
                       was crushed for our iniquities; the
                       chastening for our well-being fell upon
                       Him, and by His scourging we are
healed” (Is 53:5). Jesus, the sinless Son of God, took the
sin that was causing our death in His body and died in our
place.
      By His death, Jesus has made it possible for you to
have His righteousness, to be holy. Jesus offers His
righteousness, and thus eternal life, to you as a free gift
(Rom 5:17). Jesus, the holy Son of God, came down from
heaven and lived a sinless life. He then died on the cross,
allowing His heavenly Father (like a loving doctor) to swap
our sins with His righteousness so that we might be made
righteous (2Cor 5:21). He is our righteousness (1Cor 1:30).
God imputes Christ’s righteousness to us apart from out
works (Rom 4:6).
     For example, suppose you had smoked all your life and
were dying in the hospital of terminal lung cancer. Now I
had never smoked, but I let the doctors exchange my
healthy lungs with your cancerous lungs. What would
happen to me? I would die. What would happen to you?
You would live. Jesus, likewise, has taken what was
causing your death (i.e., your sin) and offers you that which
gives you life (i.e., His righteousness and His life).
      Jesus died “because of our transgressions, and was
raised because of our justification” (Rom 4:25). “For I
delivered to you as of first importance...that Christ died for
our sins according to the Scriptures, and that He was
buried, and that He was raised on the third day according
to the Scriptures…After that He appeared to more than five
hundred brethren at one time” (1Cor 15:3-6). Jesus said, “I
am the resurrection and the life; he who believes in Me
will live even if he dies” (Jn 11:25). Jesus was raised from
the dead and entered heaven, demonstrating that He had
taken care of our sin problem and made it possible for us to
enter heaven by trusting in Him.
                But what do you have to do?
      But what must I do to be saved? “Believe in the Lord
Jesus, and you will be saved” (Acts 16:30-31). “Of Him all
the prophets bear witness that through His name everyone
who believes in Him receives forgiveness of sins” (Acts
10:43). Jesus said, “Truly, truly, I say to you, he who
believes in Me has eternal life” (Jn 6:47). The Bible has
“been written so that you may believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God; and that by believing you may have
life in His name” (Jn 20:31). You must believe that you are
saved by simply believing in Jesus for eternal life (1Tim
1:16). We enter heaven through Jesus, who said, “I am the
way, and the truth, and the life; no one comes to the Father,
but through Me” (Jn 14:6). “I am the door; if anyone enters
through Me, then he will be saved” (Jn 10:9). We are saved
“through Him” (Rom 5:9).
     Just as an engineer can design an elevator to take you
to the top of a building and then the workers can build it,
God the Father has designed a plan by which you can reach
heaven. And His Son, Jesus, has done all the work
necessary in carrying out that plan. All you have to do is
simply enter the elevator by trusting in Jesus alone for
eternal life.
                One Foot In – One Foot Out
     But suppose you refused to trust the elevator and just
stood there outside of it, could it take you anywhere? No.
Suppose you just put one foot in the elevator and left the
other foot firmly planted on the floor outside of the
elevator, just in case the elevator did not make it, could the
elevator lift you? No. You have to trust the elevator, fully
enter into it. Likewise, you must fully trust in Christ by
trusting Him alone to take you to heaven.
     The world says to believe in yourself, and that if you
want it done right, you have to do it yourself. But Jesus
does not offer you a do-it-yourself religion. The world is
full of those. He wants you to trust Him, to believe that He
has done all that is necessary for you to be saved. He is the
Christ, the Savior, not you. Jesus paid it all and did it all for
you, in place of you. And He conditions your salvation
from eternal damnation on what you believe, not what you
do.
                             Works
             Some people are trusting in their good works for
             eternal life. But as we have already seen, we all
             fall short of God’s holy demands. None of us
are righteous. The Bible says that since salvation from hell
“is by grace, it is no longer on the basis of works,
otherwise grace is no longer grace” (Rom 11:6). If we
could get to heaven by being good, then Christ did not have
to die. Thus, those who trust in their own goodness for
eternal life are saying in effect that Christ’s death was
unnecessary. Clearly, they have failed to trust in Christ
for eternal life.
                       Faith And Works
            Other people trust in their good works and in
            Christ for eternal life. But in doing so they are
            saying in effect that Christ’s death was not good
enough, it was insufficient. Thus, they insult Christ rather
than trust Christ. For this reason the Bible warns that we are
“justified by faith apart from works” (Rom 3:28). “But to
the one who does not work, but believes in Him who
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted as righteousness”
(Rom 4:5). We must trust in Him rather than trust in what
we do for Him.
     Beware of the subtle ways in which pseudo Lordship
Salvationists add works as a condition for entering heaven.
They teach a false gospel that ultimately conditions
entrance into heaven on a faith that works (= faith +
works). Such teachers are really wolves in sheep’s clothing
(Mt 7:15), who deny salvation by faith alone. They appeal
to their good works
as necessary proof
of salvation and
thus make good
works necessary to
enter heaven.
                          Faith Alone
              We cannot be saved by believing in both
              Jesus and our good works for eternal life. Jesus
              paid the full purchase price with His precious
              blood (1Pet 1:18-19), not merely the down
payment. We must receive salvation as a free gift without
trying to earn it. “For by grace you have been saved
through faith; and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of
God; not as a result of works, that no one should boast”
(Eph 2:8-9). “The free gift of God is eternal life in Christ”
(Rom 6:23). We are “justified as a gift by His grace” (Rom
3:24).
                              Gift
      Suppose I said, “Here is a $100 bill which I offer to
you as a free gift; do you believe me?” You simply give a
nod of your head to indicate, “Yes,” so I put the $100 bill in
your pocket. How much would it cost you? Nothing. How
much would it cost me? $100. A gift costs the giver not the
recipient. Likewise, God offers you eternal life as a free
gift. It costs you nothing, but it cost God the life of His Son.
Just remember that the promise is to those who believe in
Him, not to those who believe in Him plus something else.
                            Promise
      The will of the Father is that we receive eternal life
freely by simply believing in Jesus for eternal life as a free
gift (Jn 6:37-40). Jesus promised, “Truly, truly, I say to you,
he who hears My word, and believes Him who sent Me, has
eternal life, and does not come into judgment, but has
passed out of death into life” (Jn 5:24). “I give eternal life
to them, and they will never perish” (Jn 10:28). “These
things I have written to you who believe in the name of the
Son of God, so that you may know that you have eternal
life” (1Jn 5:13). As a result of trusting in the Lord Jesus as
your Savior, you already have eternal life, and you will
never perish in hell. Best of all, you can know it!
   If you believe in Jesus alone for eternal life, then your
name belongs in the following blank. His promise to
whoever certainly includes you.
“For God so loved the world, that He gave His one-and-

 only Son, that ___________________ believes in Him
                        whoever

will not perish, but have eternal life.” (Jn 3:16).
                          Thank You
     When someone gives you a gift, it is polite to tell him,
“Thank you.” Why not express your thanks right now to
God in prayer for giving you eternal life? Jesus said, “As
many as received Him, to them (to those who believe in His
name) He gave the right to become children of God” (Jn
1:12). By trusting in Jesus for eternal life, you become a
child of God. As God’s child, it should only be natural to
tell Him, “Thank you.” Just talk to Him as a loving Daddy.
                  Discipline and Rewards
     In addition to giving us eternal life, God also wants to
demonstrate His love for us by rewarding us with
abundant life on earth (Jn 10:10). He wants to deliver us
from the destructive power of sin in our earthly lives. God
does not promise that He will spare us from trials when we
become His children. But He does provide us with strength
to overcome our trials if we will trust Him and learn to rely
upon His strength.
     Jesus is Lord. Both unbelievers and
believers will give account of their lives to the
Lord Jesus. Believers will enter heaven, but
they must live a life in harmony with the Lordship of Christ
to be rewarded with the crown of life in heaven (Rev 2:10).
God will discipline us because He loves us and in order that
“we may share His holiness” in the way we live (Heb 12:6,
10). Submitting to His discipline here on earth is to be
greatly preferred to being subjected to it in heaven.
                 www.UnconditionalSecurity.org
                       © Copyright 2009
