                                    Guaranteed Security
                                            Revised 8/10/2008

Text
“In Him, you also, after listening to the message of truth, the gospel of your salvation—having also
believed, you were sealed (sphragizo) in Him with the Holy Spirit of promise, who is given as a
guarantee (arrabon) of our inheritance, with a view to the redemption of God’s own possession, to the
praise of His glory.” (Eph 1:13-14; TM)

Arminian Sense of Tense
Eternal securitists consider Eph 1:13 a very strong affirmation of unconditional security for the
regenerate believer. Arminians will agree that the promise applies to regenerate believers but insist
that if a person stops believing then the promise no longer applies.
After all, the promise is not made to unbelievers. So Ashby’s
exegetical critique is that it is not the purpose of the passage to
affirm the existence of saved unbelievers.1 Surely, the passage
knows nothing of sealed unbelievers. Therefore, the Arminian will
appeal to the fact that we are sealed while we are believers, but then
stipulate that we become unsealed if we stop believing.

Protection
Corner rejects Dillow’s statement that the seal denotes ownership or
protection, but Corner’s counter is very poorly chosen as a
repudiation of protection: “That seal [in Mt 27:66] didn’t protect
the tomb from being opened by God’s angel when Jesus rose from
the dead!”2 But the question is, Was the seal intended to protect the
tomb from being tampered with by the disciples? Certainly
(Mt 27:64)! This is the reason “Pilate said to them, ‘You have a
guard; go, make it as secure as you know how. And they went and
made the grave secure, and along with the guard they set a seal on the stone’” (Mt 27:65-66). The seal
was placed there for security! How did Corner miss this double affirmation concerning the seal in the
very text he chose for a proof text? The old adage that a proof text is a text taken out of context
certainly seems to be true here.
From Corner’s own illustration, that of the sealed tomb, one should gather that the purpose of the seal
was for security! If this is a picture of Eph 1:13, as Corner supposes, then the seal is a beautiful picture
of eternal security. The purpose of the seal was to make the tomb as secure as possible by the one
placing the seal. The seal was even guarded to make sure it was protected from tampering. If this is
what our sealing means, then God has made us as secure as He possibly can in Christ by setting His
army as guard over us so that no one can get into Christ to tamper with us; moreover, God has placed
a stone over us that we cannot possibly move to get out of Christ. We are tamper resistant to the max!
In Resurrection Factor, Josh McDowell quotes Robertson as saying that the seal “could be placed on
the stone only in the presence of the Roman guards who were left in charge….The purpose of this
procedure was to prevent anyone from tampering with the grave’s contents.”3 Contrary to Corner, the
purpose of the seal was not merely “to show that it wasn’t tampered with by Jesus’ disciples.”4 Much
more, it was intended to prevent the disciples from tampering with the tomb. It was to make the tomb
tamper proof, to protect it from tampering, to make it as secure as humanly possible. In Evidence that
Demands a Verdict, McDowell quotes Robertson verbatim, “The sealing was done in the presence of
the Roman guards who were left in charge to protect this stamp of Roman authority and power”
(emphasis added).5 Since Corner cannot even detect that the purpose of the Matthean seal was for
protection, it is little wonder that he cannot see the purpose of the Pauline seal. Corner’s illustration
gives his own argument a coronary.
                                                                                                        2


Identification
But rather than dwell on Corner’s blunder, let us give credibility to what Corner was awkwardly
attempting to do, which is to show that the word seal has a semantic range. Some questioning this text
from an Arminian perspective have noticed that the Greek dictionaries regard seal as referring to
identification rather than security in Eph 1:13. So they have questioned the legitimacy of reading the
idea of protection into this passage. This question, at least superficially, has more credibility than
Corner’s objection. After all, BDAG defines the usage of seal in Mt 27:66 as to provide with a seal as
a security measure. This definition is in harmony with our analysis above concerning the tomb. But
the definition BDAG provides for seal in Eph 1:13 is to mark with a seal as a means of identification.
We will content ourselves with these definitions for sphragizo (seal) for the moment as making the
Arminian position plausible and move our attention to arrabon (pledge, down payment, guarantee)
for consideration as to the significance of this identification.

Pauline Sense of Tense
Arminians, of course, have assumed that we can lose the pledge. But since the pledge is a down
payment, this is an unnatural inference. The down payment has been given to us (as the person who
has believed) as guarantee that we (the person who has believed) will receive the inheritance. If we
(as the person who has believed) do not get the inheritance, the down payment would still be ours. The
promise is not made to the person who continues to believe, but to the one who has believed. It is an
aorist participle, not a present participle.

The Arminian sense of the tense is nonsense. Had Paul meant to say that we are sealed as long as we
believe (as in classical Arminianism), he could have easily have done so with chronos. He certainly
uses this word elsewhere when he wishes to express temporal duration:

    •   The law has jurisdiction over a person as long as he lives (Rom 7:1).
    •   A wife is bound as long as her husband lives (1Cor 7:39).
    •   As long as the heir is a child, he does not differ at all from a slave (Gal 4:1).

Or if he had meant that we are sealed as often as we believe (as in contemporary Arminianism), he
certainly could have said so with hosakis.

    •   As often as you drink it, in remembrance of Me (1Cor 11:25).
    •   As often as you eat this bread and drink the cup, you proclaim the Lord’s death (1Cor 11:26).

But the Arminian argument in Eph 1:13 puts words in Paul’s mouth that are not there. Paul simply
uses an aorist participle to show punctiliar, antecedent action. Such participles are normally translated
as some form of having, after, or when. For example, the first verb in the verse is also an aorist
participle and is typically translated as after listening (NAS) or after you heard (KJV, NKJ, DRA,
ERV, NJB, RWB, TNT, WEB). But it is also just as easily translated as having heard (ASV, DBY,
RSV, YLT) or when you heard (CSB, NET, NIB, NIV, NRS). Likewise, although the second verb is
most frequently translated as having believed, it could be just as well translated as after you believed
(KJV, RWB, WEB) or when you believed (CSB, NET, NLT).

So let us not think that the translation of having believed is a perfect tense denoting faith that
continues to the present. Likewise, Lenski’s comment that hearing and believing are ingressive aorists
makes no sense. Even Lenski has to admit: “The moment we come to faith the sealing occurs”
(Ephesians, 382). Our sealing is not conditioned on our continuous believing anymore than it is on our
continuous hearing. Paul is not saying that as long as or as often as we hear the gospel we are sealed.
He is simply using a series of three aorist participles to give a sequential chain of punctiliar events:

                              you heard → you believed → you were sealed
                     For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                           For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                            Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                               Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                        3



Lenski acknowledges “the aorist ‘were sealed’ fits one act of sealing” (Ephesians, 383). It is not
protracted hearing or believing that results in sealing. Since the sealing occurs instantaneously, the
very moment we first believe, it is conditioned on punctiliar faith, not linear believing. In other words,
Paul does not say, “He who continuously hears and continuously believes is continuously sealed.”

Paul uses this aoristic chain to show his ordo salutis: hearing proceeds believing and believing
proceeds sealing. (Incidentally, the Calvinistic notion that faith is a gift that comes after regeneration
in Eph 2:8-9 is proven false by the Pauline sequence of events here in Eph 1:13.) What Paul is saying,
therefore, is: “When you heard and subsequently believed, you were consequently sealed.” The
sealing was the consequence of punctiliar hearing. Although these events are temporally simultaneous,
they are logically sequential.

Guarantee
Whether or not the believing is impermanent, the sealing is permanent. How do we know this? Well,
in addition to the sense of the tense and the absence of such words such as chronos and hosakis, we
can make this affirmation because of Paul’s addition of arrabon (pledge, down payment, guarantee) in
the next verse. Its commercial usage as a down payment is easy to understand.

I made a down payment on my house to the mortgage company to guarantee that I would finish
paying off my house. If I do not finish paying off my house, I lose the down payment and the
mortgage company gets to keep it. The giver of the down payment loses the down payment to the
recipient of the transaction if the giver of the down payment fails to complete the transaction. In this
case, God loses the Holy Spirit to us if He does not make good on His promise. God is the one making
the promise in this context, not us.

Non-returnable
But the Arminian will immediately respond that we might return the down payment. But according to
the Bible, God’s gifts are not so easily returned. In fact, they are non-returnable (Rom 11:29). To
return the down payment to the owner, the owner would have to receive it. To receive it, He must take
it. To take it, He must renege on His promise that the reception and retention of the down payment
was conditioned on our initial acceptance. The down payment is ours to keep, not ours to return.

It is incumbent upon God to make the payments. If He does not, He loses His down payment—His
security deposit. The purpose of the verse is not to entertain the hypothetical possibility that we can
lose the deposit, but that God hypothetically would if He did not follow through on the completion of
what He has started. It is His deposit, not ours. He is the one who stands to lose the deposit, not us. In
making the assertion that we can return the down payment, the Arminian is standing the verse on its
head by suggesting that we can lose the deposit. This is not the point of the verse. The only
hypothetical loss that the verse entertains is the possibility that God might lose the deposit. The point
of the verse is that the deposit is ours to keep if God does not fulfill the promise. If God fails to
deliver, for whatever reason, even if it is because of some moral failure on our part such as not
wanting the deposit anymore, He is not at liberty to take the deposit from us. It is ours to keep.

What is guaranteed
There can be no room for reasonable doubt as to the fact that the Holy Spirit is the down payment (i.e.,
earnest) in the NT passages. In addition to describing the Spirit as our down payment in Eph 1:14,
Paul also repeats this illustration in 2Cor 5:5, where he uses arrabon to say, “Now He who has
prepared us for this very thing [i.e., for having an immortal body] is God, who also has given us the
Spirit as a guarantee” (NKJ). Is the guarantee that we will always want what God has prepared for us?
No. The guarantee is that we will get what God has prepared for us. His fidelity, not ours, is
                     For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                           For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                            Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                               Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                         4


guaranteed. Therefore, it is He “who guarantees our inheritance until we come into possession” (Eph
1:14; CJB). Even in the case of this translation, which might be taken as suggesting that it is our
possession which awaits relation, the guarantee is that God will do what is necessary for us to come
into possession of this inheritance. If we fail to inherit it, then it is because God has failed. He is the
one who made the guarantee, not us. He is the guarantor; we are the guaranteed. God has given us the
Holy Spirit as His security deposit to guarantee our security. The Lord “put His seal on us and gave us
his Spirit in our hearts as a guarantee for the future” (2Cor 1:22; TM).

LN defines arrabon as “the first or initial payment of money or assets, as a guarantee for the
completion of a transaction.” Friberg and the UBS also define it as a guarantee. But I still appreciate
the way Strong defines it: “earnest (a part payment in advance for security).” The seal is a down
payment which guarantees our security. But Paul conjoins the seal with pledge in both 1Cor 1:22 and
Eph 1:13-14. Consequently, the seal must convey a guarantee of security in Paul’s mind. Now, to be
sure, the word seal does not mean down payment, but there must be an overlapping somewhere of
their semantic domain for the parallelism to make sense. Could it be that both words denote protection
in the way he is using them? Perhaps we should reconsider whether or not the Arminian restriction of
the word seal to mean identification has overlooked a link that Paul believes exists with protection.

Security
As we have already noted, BDAG does not define the usage of seal in Mt 27:66 as falling in the same
section as that of Eph 1:14. The former verse is defined in the first section of BDAG’s definition as
meaning to provide with a seal as a security measure but the latter is defined in the third section as to
mark with a seal as a means of identification. So according to the standard biblical Greek dictionary
of our day, the sealing of the tomb denotes security but the sealing of the believer refers to
identification.

But now it is time for the rest of the story. BDAG goes on to say that the purpose of the seal in this
latter section pertaining to the believer is to mark with a seal as a means of identification…so that the
mark denoting ownership also carries with it the protection of the owner (bold mine). BDAG gives
the sealing of believers in Rev 7:3 as the reference. But there is no reason to suppose that John’s
imagery of believers being sealed on their foreheads is significantly different than Paul’s statement
that believers are sealed in their hearts (2Cor 1:22). Therefore, in contrast to Corner, BDAG regards
the third category in which it places Eph 1:13 as denoting both ownership and protection. Dillow was
right all along in regarding this as a picture of OSAS.

Now, as to Corner, who likes to pit one proponent of OSAS against another, he should realize that this
procedure is a two-edged sword. We can do the same with NOSAS. Corner says that the seal in
Eph 1:13 does not denote ownership; Lenski says that it does. Which NOSAS proponent is correct?
Lenski obviously. It denotes the protection by the owner.

As for the Arminians who point to the Greek lexicons and claim that Eph 1:14 is listed under
identification rather than security, they are making a false dichotomy. There is no such sharp
distinction between sealed for identification versus security. The identification shows ownership. We
belong to God. We are under the protection of our owner. We are under God’s protection. This is
identification that results in protection. It is an identification that results in a guarantee of security.

Thayer also puts Eph 1:13 in the third section of his definition. Like BDAG, he starts off this section
by pointing out that seal is used in Rev 7:3 to stamp his servants on their foreheads as destined for
eternal salvation, and by this means to confirm their hopes. Naturally, Thayer places Eph 1:13 into
this same section as respecting God, who by the gift of the Holy Spirit indicates who are his.
Ownership and the completion of our salvation and confirmation of our expectations of living with
Christ in heaven are being affirmed.
                     For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                           For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                            Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                               Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                         5



Constable summarizes: “God sealed them in Christ. This provided a guarantee of their eternal
security” (Ephesians, 15). He defers fuller discussion to Woodcock who spends an entire article
defending this thesis.6 Concerning the seal, Woodcock concludes, “What He owns, He also protects”
(p. 147). “Since believers are God’s inviolable property, He will protect them. As a result, believers
can enjoy complete security in their relationship with Him” (p. 150). This relational security is
guaranteed by the seal.

Sphere
There is yet another confirmation of our security in this passage. Paul affirms that we are sealed in
Christ. Translations vary, but even those translations which place the second in Him (en ho) as the
object of believe (so that it is translated as believe in Him) are almost uniform in acknowledging that
we are sealed in Him by virtue of the first en ho.

For example, the ESV reads: “In him (en ho) you also, when you heard the word of truth, the gospel of
your salvation, and believed in him (en ho), were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit” (Eph 1:13). In
other words, when you believed in Him, you were sealed in Him. The RSV likewise reads, “In him
you also, who have heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, and have believed in him,
were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit.” You not only believe in Christ; you are sealed in Christ.

Conversely we could also say that we are not only sealed, we are sealed in Christ. We are identified
as belong to God. That is security. We saw that lexically. Now, we further see contextually that we are
identified as being in Christ. This double security is reminiscent of Jn 10:28-29.

Yet Lenski claims, “The idea that the Christ is the container into which we were placed, and that this
container is then sealed up, will scarcely find acceptance” (Ephesians, 383). On the contrary, we are
not merely sealed in connection with Christ as Lenski claims. Christ is not sealed; we are. Taken
together, Eph 1:13-14 and 2Cor 1:22 certainly justify the children’s object lesson in which you take a
picture of a child, draw a picture of a dove on the back of it, place it in an envelope labeled Christ, and
then seal it. There is a double sealing, a sealing of the Holy Spirit in our hearts and of us in Christ. Of
course, there are other texts in which Paul talks about our being baptized into Christ (Rom 6:3;
Gal 3:27) by the Spirit (1Cor 12:13) so that by God’s doing we are in Christ (1Cor 1:30) and new
creatures in Christ (2Cor 5:17) created in Christ (Eph 2:10). But for the purpose of our illustration, we
will just picture our double sealing. (For our animation of the following illustration, see Double Seal.)




But a variation of this object lesson will allow us to have fun with the Arminian insistence of
identification and connection. Take a picture of the child, or a Xerox® copy of it, and smear glue all
over the back and front of it. Then drop it into a clear Zip Lock® container labeled Christ, or better yet,
Our Identification In Christ. After all, it is a photo ID. Then glue the container shut. The picture will

                     For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                           For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                            Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                               Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                           6


not only be in the container, it will be connected to the container. The picture will not only retain its
own identity, but also that of the container. Then you can show a picture of your driver’s license (or a
heated ID badge) and explain that it works something like this procedure. Your picture is permanently
part of the container. You cannot remove the picture without doing violence to both the container and
the glue keeping it within the container. The glue represents the Holy Spirit of course, and the plastic
represents Christ. Explain that the only way to take the picture out of the container would be to cut it
out, in which case the picture gets to keep the glue and the plastic. If you cut the picture out to
illustrate this point, you could burn the picture to show the dark conclusion to which Arminianism
leads if the passage is properly interpreted. The only way for you to burn in hell is for the Holy Spirit
and Christ (the glue and plastic) to burn there with you.

Possession
That which is sealed in Eph 1:13 is identified as God’s possession by virtue of the lexical meaning of
the word seal. The sealing denotes ownership in this context. But one does not have to know Greek to
deduce this fact. The very next verse says that the pledge “is given as a guarantee of our inheritance,
for the redemption of God’s own possession” (TM). In denying that the seal denotes ownership in v.
13, Corner has ignored v. 14 which says that we are God’s purchased possession (peripoiesis; NKJV).
Does this not mean that He owns us? Of course it does! Corner has ripped the seal out of its context in
claiming that it does not indicate God’s ownership in this context. How can he be so blind as to deny
that the seal refers to ownership when the very next verse explicitly says that we are God’s own
possession (peripoiesis)?

There is no question that the preserving (peripoiesis) of our soul requires persevering faith in Heb
10:29. But the salvation of our soul is a misthological concept. The sealing is a soteriological concept
regarding the redemption of our body. Still, there is no reason that we could not follow the example of
those like Wuest who refer to the general idea of peripoiesis as preserving for one’s self in the
Ephesian context. We are God’s purchased possession which He preservers for Himself. Unlike Heb
10:29, here in the Ephesian passage God is the preserver. Your identification as God’s possession
guarantee’s God’s protection. If an Arminian cannot find security in his identity in Christ in this
passage, then he needs to have his exegetical eyes examined.

Metaphysical Union
Paul specifies the location of this sealing pledge as our heart: “Who also sealed us and gave us the
Spirit in our hearts as a pledge” (2Cor 1:22). In Modern Greek, arrabon is used of an engagement
ring. But in the Koine Greek in which Paul is expressing our security, he does not locate the seal on
our finger but in our hearts. Engagement rings can be returned, sealed hearts cannot. Even in the
physical arena, you cannot cut our your own heart. Many might object that someone could climb up
on the operating table and let the devil cut out their transformed heart and in this way become
separated from Christ. But Paul has ruled out anyone receiving such an assisting hand from the devil
in Rom 8:35-39. The devil does not have a license from God to perform this kind of surgery.

Some might respond that Paul is not referring to our physical heart, so this illustration is too literal. To
be sure, Paul is metaphysically referring to our heart. As a matter of fact, he refers to it as our spirit on
another occasions. For example, in 1Cor 6:17 he says, “But the one who joins himself to the Lord is
one spirit with Him.” In Rom 8:10 he likewise states, “And if Christ is in you, though the body is
[experientially] dead because of sin, yet the spirit is [ontologically] alive because of [imputational]
righteousness.” As we have shown elsewhere, Rom 8:10 proves that Rom 8:13 is not saying that we
can die spiritually. Christ remains in a believer’s spirit even if the believer is experientially dead in
sin. See Static Versus Dynamic Life.

But the point in our present discussion is that having the Spirit dwelling in us is equated with having
the Spirit of Christ in our spirit and belonging to Christ (Rom 8:9). Metaphysically speaking, we
                      For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                            For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                             Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                         7


would have to open up our spirit and take out the Spirit of Christ if we wished to unseal ourselves. But
we do not have the tools by which to perform such an operation. We did not give birth to ourselves,
and we cannot un-birth ourselves. We can commit physical suicide, but we cannot commit spiritual
suicide. We can only kill the body (Lk 12:4). Our literal illustration above well illustrates the
metaphysical impossibility facing us if contemplate spiritual suicide.

Paul gives us a very easy means by which to understand the point he is making concerning being
spiritually joined to the Lord in 1Cor 6:17 since he compares it to sex: “The one who joins himself to
a harlot is one body with her” because ‘the two will become one flesh” (1Cor 6:16). You cannot crawl
into bed with a harlot and then claim to be unaffected by it when you crawl out of bed. That
experience becomes a part of you (and you will be judged for it). Paul’s indication is that there is
something lasting about the experience. He is also informing us through various illustrations, such as
seals and pledges, that there is something lasting about our spiritual union with the Lord. You cannot
go back and become a spiritual virgin after your spiritual union with the Lord anymore than you can
go back and become a physical virgin after your physical union with a harlot.

God’s Glory
Paul concludes Eph 1:14 by saying that this guaranteed redemption is to the praise of His glory
(doxa). It is not to the praise of the glory of our perseverance but to the praise of the glory of His
preservation. Contrary to Calminianism, our perseverance cannot be a condition for the retention of
our redemption; otherwise, we would get to share the glory for our redemption. The exclusive nature
of this doxology rules out our cooperation in retaining this redemption. Sure we may work in coming
to saving faith, but this punctiliar response of faith has no meritorious value. But our subsequent faith
does have meritorious value and can result in our praise (1Pet 1:7). Therefore, sealing cannot be
conditioned on our subsequent faith. Sealing is based on our initial faith, not our persevering in faith.
Our possession of life was, and remains, conditioned on our punctiliar response of faith so that God’s
grace may be solely glorified in that our redemption was, and is, not conditioned on anything
meritorious that we do.

Devil’s Glory
God is the obvious sealer in this passage. The Lord’s promise prevents Him from taking the Spirit
from us or from unsealing us. And yet the claim is often made that we can unseal ourselves and send
the Holy Spirit away by means of our free will. Let us suppose for the moment that everything we
have said above is wrong and that we can in fact stand the verse on its head with our perverted minds,
find a loop hole that Paul did not anticipate, unseal ourselves, and force the Holy Spirit to leave. Who
gets the credit? We do. Right? Yes. But not exclusively. As we burn in hell, we will have to share
credit with Satan for our achievement of overpowering the Holy Spirit and breaking God’s
unconditional promise. After all, once we meet the condition of punctiliar faith, it was incumbent
upon God to keep His promise. There are no more conditions for us to keep. There were no strings
attached. So let us assume that we can take this engagement ring (a contemporary translation for
arrabon) and throw it back in God’s face. He does not have the right to take it, but we have the
audacity to return it.

Will we be able to take sole responsibility for our action? No. Satan will be able to step up to God and
say, “See what I made him do. Throw that ring right back in Your face.” This is not an affirmation of
the devil-made-me-do-it philosophy. It is simply an acknowledgement that Satan will be able to at
least claim partial credit by influentially (rather than irresistibly) causing us to throw the ring back in
God’s face. Satan will be able to say, “I put him up to it. I get partial credit for his rebellion. I had a
hand in it.” It does not matter if the stimulus was from our old sin nature. The devil can take
considerable credit for that also. We did it with the devil’s helpful influence. We were acting under his
influence. If we can squirm out of Christ, then the devil can boast to Christ that he had a part to play in
it. Can this happen? Absolutely not!
                     For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                           For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                            Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                               Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                        8



We cannot separate ourselves from Christ without giving the devil room to boast. By cutting off any
room for the devil to boast in Rom 8:35-39, Paul cuts off any avenue by which we can separate
ourselves from Christ. Paul does the same thing in Eph 1:13-14 and its related passages pertaining to
the seal and pledge. God has pledged to take the entire responsibility upon Himself to see to it that we
bodily reach immortality and arrive safely home. God has a life grip on us that will not let go (2Cor
5:4-8).

Rabbits
Shank and Corner want to chase NOSAS rabbits in an attempt to try to prove that Paul cannot mean
what he says.7 Sure Christians can be cut off in Rom 11:22 and severed from Christ in Gal 5:4.
Hunting such Calminian rabbits can be fun. But Dillow has already skinned those rabbits, and we tan
their hides in the Outer Darkness. Suffice it to say here that being severed experientially and
misthologically does not prove that one can be severed ontologically or positionally.

We have basically contented ourselves here with the affirmations that Paul makes concerning our
sealing. We will not pull any further OSAS rabbits out of the hat to distract from these texts: such as
the affirmation that believers will never perish (Jn 10:28), that the Spirit will abide with us forever
(Jn 14:16), and that Christ will never leave us (Heb 13:5). Those texts deserve their own treatment in
their contexts.

Nonetheless, there are a couple of NOSAS rabbits worthy of response. Woodcock acknowledges that
“Paul’s language in Ephesians 4:30 probably echoes that of Isaiah 63:10,” however, Woodcock goes
on to add, “But his context and the point he made are different….Paul was writing in the context of
the New Covenant, under which God has saved, sealed, and guaranteed the inheritance of the
redeemed” (p. 161). In Is 63:10, God redeemed Israel, but Israel rebelled and grieved the Holy Spirit,
so God became their enemy. That possibility still exists in the NT (Jam 4:4). But there is a new
dimension in the New Testament. In the NT we are now sealed with the Spirit as a down payment. He
cannot leave us. However, the Spirit could leave OT believers (Ps 51:11).

Corner brings up a strawman version of the OSAS as protesting: “God would never give his Spirit to
later take it away from a person” (374). Corner brushes away this caricature of OSAS with a reference
to 1Sam 16:14 in which “the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul.” First of all, securitist have long
acknowledged that in the OT the Spirit could come and go upon a person.8 So Corner is deliberately
misrepresenting the OSAS position. Second, being sealing by the Spirit (2Cor 1:22; Eph 1:13; 4:30),
being given the Spirit as a down payment (2Cor 1:22; 2Cor 5:5; Eph 1:14), and being given the Spirit
as a gift (Acts 2:38; 10:45) are NT phenomena. Such matters are irrevocable (Rom 11:29).

Granted, Corner wants to limit the promise in Rom 11:29 to a nationalistic promise rather than
individualistic guarantee (pp. 418-419). But he then turns around and pits Chafer against Pink as
OSAS proponents who cannot agree as to whether or not the context is exclusively nationalistic (p.
490-491). Chafer takes the nationalistic route while Pink takes the individualistic alternative. But
Pink is a conditional securitist! It is a shame, perhaps even a scam, for Corner to pretend that
conditional securitists on the Calvinistic side of the fence are “proponents of OSAS.”9 There is no
excuse for someone who is familiar with FG writings to act as if the writings of Pink and his ilk are
written from the same perspective as those who genuinely believe in eternal security. Pink, whom
Corner cites, no less than Corner himself, believes that you must persevere or perish (p. 491). Just
because a Calvinistic book bears the title Eternal Security, this does not mean that it genuinely affirms
eternal security. Pink is not a securitist.

But aside from Corner’s mismatch, Corner paints himself into a corner with his inconsistent
treatments of Rom 11:22 and 29. If 11:22 teaches that an individual can be cut off, as Corner
                     For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                           For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                            Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                               Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                        9


repeatedly insists,10 then how can Corner turn around and claim that 11:29 is not individualistic. If he
can use 11:22 individualistically, then how can he criticize OSAS for doing so in 11:29. OSAS claims
that the principle of irrevocability in 11:29 applies individualistically as well. Corner wants to limit
the irrevocability of v. 29 pluralistically to Israel. But the context pertaining to Israel does not
commence in v. 25—the point to which Corner takes his readers.

As every well-informed reader knows, this whole section in Romans is dealing with Israel (Rom 9-
11). The natural branches being cut off in this very context (11:17-24) refer to Israel! It is
irresponsible for Corner to claim that irrevocability in v. 29 must be limited nationalistically to Israel
when he himself insists that the cutting off in the same context has individualistic applicability. We
deal with the meaning of these texts in the Outer Darkness and need not detain ourselves with such
matters here, other than to mention that being cut off in the outer darkness poses no conflict with the
soteriological security Paul pictures in Eph 1:13-14.11

Summary
The purpose of this seal in Eph 1:13 in identifying us as belonging to God is to guarantee our
redemption as His possession. In identifying us as His possession, the seal guarantees us redemption.
We find absolute security in our identity in this passage. The seal identifies us as His. Consequently,
there are multiple attestations of security in Eph 1:13-14: the tense of the verbs, the meanings of seal
and down payment, the sphere, the affirmation of our being God’s possession, and the fact that we do
not get any glory. We have aspectual, lexical, spherical, and doxological security in this context. Our
soteriological security is completely assured. OSAS is the only logical conclusion. Any doubt which
says that we can become unsealed has been found to have no right to exist. There comes a time when
you simply have to exegetically grab your doubt by the throat and deny its right to exist. That time is
now. To do otherwise is to doubt the integrity of the One who has made the promise. For our
animation of the following illustration, see Choke doubt.




                     For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                           For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                            Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                               Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                           10



1
  Stephen M. Ashby, Four Views on Eternal Security, 167.
2
  Daniel D. Corner, The Believer’s Conditional Security, 446. Emphasis his.
3
  Josh McDowell, The Resurrection Factor, 59.
4
  Corner, 446.
5
  Josh McDowell, Evidence that Demands a Verdict, revised edition, 222.
6
  Eldon Woodcock, “The Seal of the Holy Spirit,” Bibliotheca Sacra 155:618 (April-June 1998):139-
63.
7
  Shank devotes ch. 8 of Life in the Son to such conceptual parallels.
8
  Robert Gromacki, Is Salvation Forever?, 160-165.
9
  Corner,476. On this page Corner labels the FG view of OSAS as the extreme view and the Calvinistic
view as the moderate view and tells his readers that there is only a slight difference between the two! After
providing this slight-of-hand definition, he then goes on to show that there are considerable differences
between the two camps after all.
10
   Corner, Security, 256, 323, 378, 399, 414, 445, 562-565, 611, 691.
11
   This article is less than half the length of the corresponding appendix in the Outer Darkness dealing with
this subject matter. See that discussion for a more in-depth treatment.




                      For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                            For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                             Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                Misthologist@misthology.org
