                    Horn’s Wormwood-Rapture Prediction
                                                        4/23/2021
Introduction
        In two of his books and various interviews, Tom Horn relates a prophetic vision he had of an asteroid striking
Earth. 1 He associates this asteroid with the eschatological Wormwood (thus the third trumpet of Rev 8:11) and
NASA’s Apophis (a large asteroid that is supposed to miss Earth). Horn rejects NASA’s near miss projection. Horn
contends that if Apophis is coming close enough to knock out Earth’s satellites, as NASA predicts, then impact
with Earth is inevitable, despite NASA’s denials, making the impact date of Apophis 4/13/2029. 2 Horn sees the
first four trumpet judgments in Rev 8:1-13 as describing the stages of the impact of Apophis/Wormwood. 3 He
roughly places these events at the middle of the tribulation and then makes some projections as to when the rapture
would likely happen. His prophetic vision of the Earth being struck by Apophis might be accurate. Two previous
prophecies he accurately made give plausibility to the accuracy of his visions. 4 Nonetheless, his calculations
regarding the timing of the rapture, which were not a part of the vision, are errant. Additionally, his associating the
impact of Apophis with Wormwood is not part of the vision but merely an inference he draws from his own analysis.
Horn’s Projection
       Early in his first book, Wormwood (p. 27), Horn provides the initial basis for his computation:
              Assuming for the moment that Apophis is biblical Wormwood (I’m not certifying that or setting
       dates here) and that 2029 would thus represent a period sometime around the middle of the great tribulation
       period when the trumpet judgments begin, Monday, October 13, 2025 (April 13, 2029, minus three and a
       half years) would be the approximate start date of the dreaded seven years of tribulation foreseen in
       Scripture (see Matthew 24:21; Revelation 7:14; and Daniel 12:1).
              ….Depending on one’s particular position, this would place the last possible date for a pre-
       tribulation rapture happening sometime around October 13, 2025.

       He mentions asteroid 2018 LF16 as another NEO (Near Earth Object) of interest, with a near collision date of
8/8/2023. But the focus of his discussion is on Apophis. During an online review of Horn’s book Wormwood, Derick
Gilbert notes that Horn’s projected date of the rapture on October 13, 2025 coincides with the Feast of Tabernacles. 5 This
observation led to Horn’s second book, Messenger, which computes the possible time of the rapture in relation to
significant Jewish dates.




1 Thomas Horn, The Wormwood Prophecy (Lake Mary, FL: Charisma House, 2019). Thomas Horn, The Messenger: It’s

Headed Towards Earth! It Cannot be Stopped! And it’s Carrying the Secret of America’s, the Word’s, and your
Tomorrow! (Defender Crane, MO: USA, 2020). For example, see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9YU6vHKXPqg
and https://sidroth.org/television/tv-archives/tom-horn-2.
2 “The Wormwood Prophecy” (6:00-7:00). Available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xEgzqq9YMLU. Accessed

3/9/2021. Also see https://www.skywatchtv.com/2021/03/25/part21. Accessed 3/31/2021.
3 For all four trumpets describing the detailed stages of this singular event, see “Wormwood Prophecy | Thomas Horn

Joni Table Talk | Joni Lamb” (21:05-23:00). Available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UZ24MKsgj7Y. Accessed
3/9/2021.
4 For descriptions of two previous visions, see “End Times Vatican & Wormwood Prophecies | Tom Horn | Something

More.” Available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ymzBPvBWiIQ. Accessed 3/9/2021.
5 “RIGHT OUT OF THE BOOK OF REVELATION -- ANDROMEDA STRAIN ‘ALIEN MICROORGANISM’

RACING TOWARD EARTH” (16:30-17:08). Available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WFYo7X2hO_M&t=4s.
Accessed 3/10/2021.

                                             Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2021
                                               Misthologist@misthology.org
Wormwood and Rapture                                                                                                  Page 2
        The above chart is a summation of his position. In this interview (12:26), as well as in his book, he mistakenly
places the impact by Apophis/Wormwood at the middle of the tribulation. Then he subtracts 3.5 years from the projected
impact date to derive the approximate date of the rapture. He repeats his statement above from Wormwood but associates
it with the Feast of Booths in Messenger (p. 156):

      Depending on one’s position, this would place the last possible date for a pre-Tribulation Rapture sometime
      around October 13, 2025.
            October 13, 2025, is 21 Tishri on the Hebrew calendar, the seventh day of the annual Feast of
      Tabernacles (Sukkot, literally “Feast of Booths”).

       The contributors for Messenger find arguments for both the mid-tribulation and pre-tribulation rapture to be
compelling. I do not. I am decidedly pre-tribulational in my perspective. Nevertheless, I am not nearly so decisive in my
preference for the Feast of Trumpets as the probable time for the rapture. Gary Stearman argues well for the return of the
Lord on Pentecost, which would be my second preference. The Feast of Booths might be my third preference. In any
case, Horn acknowledges that the fifth trumpet covers an important period of five months (p. 184):

             The fifth trumpet (Revelation 9:1–11).
             This is one of the more intriguing sections of the Book of Revelation. “A star fallen from heaven”
      unlocks the abyss and lets out a horde of locust-like creatures who are given five months to torment those
      who are not sealed by God. Why five months? It’s not a coincidence; it bookends the one hundred fifty
      days (five thirty-day months on the lunar calendar) that Noah and his family were aboard the ark before it
      came to rest in the mountains of Ararat. (Emphasis his.)

       Unfortunately, he does not factor in these 5 months (Rev 9:5) into his calculations. Plus, in his discussion of
the sixth trumpet, he fails to note that it seemingly lasts 13 months (Rev 9:15; cf. GNTC, JPCS). His calculations
are thus probably off by at least a total of 18 months when he continues to subtract 3.5 years (p. 186):

             Are we correct that the asteroid of Revelation 8 will impact the earth in 2029? Will a pre-Tribulation
      Rapture occur 3.5 years earlier, during the prophetic Feast of Tabernacles? Or a few days earlier, during
      the prophetic Feast of Trumpets (placing the Church at the [M]arriage supper of the Lamb in heaven for
      the real Feast of Trumpets gathering around the “House” of God, as was mirrored in the Old Testament?)
      Time will tell.

       Personally, if Horn were correct in his calculations, I would opt for the Feast of Trumpets, which occurs a
few days earlier. However, in addition to apparently being off 18 months, he has errored in calculating the rapture
as 3.5 years before the middle of the tribulation. Granted, this is the standard dispensational model (SDM). But
SDM fails to explain the necessity of Israel burning the weapons used against them for seven years before the
middle of the tribulation (Eze 39:9) and their need to cleanse the land for seven months beforehand (Eze 39:12).
Various scholars have addressed such shortcomings by posing that the Ezekiel battle of Gog and Magog (Eze 38:2)
occurs sufficiently far enough in advance of the tribulation to accommodate these necessities. Bill Salus has
popularized this alternative Ezekiel Gog Magog Model (EGMM) in several books. Douglas Berner has several
books defending it as well, and he ably explores various possibilities. Even so, let us begin by interacting with
Horn’s projections, as if Wormwood occurs at the middle of the tribulation and is the Apophis of 4/13/2029.
Wormwood and Rapture                                                                                                  Page 3

        If we look for a time for the rapture at least 3.5 years before the middle of the tribulation at the Feast of Trumpets
in 2025, we have an excess of 38 days between the Rapture and the beginning of the tribulation. Theoretically, this
projection would work, in that SDM must posit a period of unknown time between the rapture and the start of the
tribulation, as Berner notes on his chart of the standard pretribulational rapture. 6 The 3.5 figure is noted in red,
nonetheless, because the 3.5 period is too short. At least seven years of peace in Israel are needed for Israel to dispose of
the weapons, ruling out Pentecost 2025 as well. So, the light gray rows at the top of the chart must be rejected.
        If we move the rapture seven years before the middle of the tribulation, computations for the Feast of Trumpets
fall short by 129 days. Seven Jewish years would be 7 x 360 = 2520 days. But the Feast of Trumpets 2022 is only 2391
days from the middle of the tribulation, which is not enough time. Even Pentecost 2022 would fall short by 16 days.
Therefore, these dark gray rows in the middle of the chart must be rejected as well.
        If per Eze 39:9-12 we add the 7 months of cleansing to the 7 years of burning, we move to a timeframe that works.
The bottom two rows highlighted in yellow with no red flags represent EGMM. They work. Feast of Trumpets 2021
would yield an excess of 45 days, thus supplying the necessary period of unknown time between the rapture and the
beginning of the Day of the Lord (Eze 30:3) at the Ezekiel battle of Gog and Magog. Pentecost 2021 would also work,
with an excess of 152 days. Pragmatically, a relatively short buffer of unspecified length after the rapture is needed for
both SDM and EGMM.
        Berner has a variety of charts depicting the rapture as happening at the time of the breaking of the seals in his
version of the ECMM. I hold this model as well. Consequently, our more precise charts acknowledge the pause between
the rapture (and breaking of the seals) versus the trumpet judgments. The biblical text confirms the EGMM pause between
the seals and trumpets: “And when He broke the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour”
(Rev 8:1). The trumpet judgments then proceed after the brief period of silence. Does this mean that EGMM can
accommodate Horn’s Wormwood prophecy and allow the brief period of silence as lasting 45 days after the rapture
at the Feast of Trumpets in 2021? Unfortunately, not. For EGMM shows another weakness in Horn’s proposal.
        Horn is trying to compute backwards from the time of the third trumpet until the rapture using SDM. As
already noted, he failed to include the probable 18+ month gap between this trumpet and the middle of the
tribulation. Does this mean that we can adjust his computation by 18+ months to correct his miscalculation? Again,
unfortunately not. For reasons already noted, EGMM is superior to SDM. The 18+ month correction would assume
a SDM timeframe. But EGMM already has this 18+ months included. Even more importantly, EGMM moves these
trumpet judgements closer to the beginning of the Day of the Lord than does SDM, thereby changing the
computational basis for Wormwood.
        In intervenes, Berner points out the Ezekiel battle of Gog and Magog in Eze 39:9-16 “is followed by 7 months
of cleansing the land and burying the dead and 7 years of burning weapons” (p. 339). He thus poses 7 months of
cleanings and 7 years of burning. My initial impression of his statement was that the 7 months might proceed the 7
years or might overlap. I asked Berner for greater specificity. 7 He responded:

              I prefer 3 1/2 or more years between the rapture and the beginning of Daniel's 70th Week. The
       primary reason for the 3 1/2 years is the burning of the weapons for 7 years, however, we do not know for
       certain that the burning will be initiated immediately following God’s destruction of Gog & Magog. While
       the burning of the weapons for 7 years is mentioned first (possibly emphasizing its primary
       importance) the cleansing of the land (decontamination and burying the dead) for seven months
       followed by a subsequent search of the land is also specifically noted and depicted. The immediate need
       for decontamination and mass burial of the dead will most likely take priority over converting the weapons
       and military equipment into commercial energy. Keep in mind also the extreme measures that Israel has
       taken over the past year dealing with Covid 19. We should take note of these expedited and extreme
       measures that Israel has already adopted into our projection of Israel’s reaction to the immediate aftermath
       of God's destructive intervention. That suggests to me that decontamination and cleansing of the land of
       Israel will take precedence. That situation (along with the continuing threat or risk of a pestilence or
       pandemic i.e. Covid 19) very well may delay the beginning of the 7 years of burning of the weapons
       for a short period of time. 8

6 Douglas Berner, When God Intervenes: The Beginning of the End (USA, 2013), 45.
7 He also discusses this 7-month-7-year period in his earlier book. Douglas Berner, The Silence is Broken! God Hooks

Ezekiel’s God & Magog (USA, 2006), 224-225.
8 Personal correspondence, 3/5/2021.
Wormwood and Rapture                                                                                                      Page 4

              The mass burial will probably begin during the 7 months, with a final intensive inspection at the end
       of the 7 months. I find the entire passage in Ezekiel 39 fascinating in that it is so unique. I know of no other
       treatment of a post-war scenario anywhere in the Bible. To read this passage from the perspective of the
       past 75 years of world history is one thing. How in the world would someone have interpreted these few
       verses two thousand years ago? 9




        Insight increases as the time of the end approaches. Berner’s insight is very timely and rational. The above chart
is a more realistic calculation of the span of time in which we might expect Wormwood to hit. As a result of Berner’s
latest explanations above, I tweaked my online chart of Revelation. Previously, I had followed his published example in
noting the sorrows beginning before the tribulation 3 ½ +/- years. 10 I now simply have it as being 3 ½+ years. Apparently,
this beginning of sorrows will last for (1) a period of 30 minutes of heavenly silence (2) plus 7 months of cleaning of the
land (3) plus the 3.5 years burning the weapons—all before the beginning of the tribulation. 11 Thus, the beginning of
sorrows will run over 3.5 years, not potentially fall short of it.




9 Personal correspondence, 3/6/2021.
10 Berner, Intervenes, 326. His more detailed chart of the seals, trumpets and bowls is found in subsequent book: Douglas

Berner, The Fullness of Times: A Charted View of Revelation & The Sequence of Prophetic Events of the End Times
(USA, 2018), 240. Our perspectives are similar. I condense trumpets 1-4 more so than he does, which would be conducive
to Horn’s model. Nevertheless, in my chart for a More Realistic Calculation, I have broadened the range for Wormwood
to accommodate Berner’s chart in Fullness (p. 240) and my personal correspondence and discussion with him.
11 Alternatively, one might say that the 30 minutes of heavenly silence includes an unspecified period of delay plus the

specified seven months of cleansing. Regardless, the end result remains the same.
Wormwood and Rapture                                                                                                 Page 5

        In the above extract from my chart, the red arrows call attention to these two changes. 12 The time from the rapture
until the middle of the tribulation will be comprised of three things: a short heavenly silence + 7 months + 7 years.
Computing using Jewish years, 7 months plus 7 years yields 7.583 years, to which the brief period of heavenly silence
must be added. After all, Israel is not going to start cleansing the land the day after the battle, particularly if nuclear
contamination is involved, as seems probable. In any case, Israel will need enough time to recover sufficiently to start
cleanup operations.
        Thus, if computing from the middle of the tribulation, this would put the rapture 7.583+ years from the middle of
the tribulation. Wormwood would take place relatively quickly after the rapture. How many days, weeks, or months
afterward is a matter of conjecture since we do not know how long the approximate 30 minutes of silence in Heaven will
be in relation to the passage of time on Earth. The silence is a dramatic pause, which serves, among other things, as a
brief interlude in the judgments. Commentators frequently refer to this silence as the lull before the storm. On the other
hand, considering the severity of the seal judgments just experienced in which 1/4 of Earth’s population is killed, it would
be better described as the eye of the hurricane. This pause between the stormy judgments on Earth will be relatively short
as Earth dwellers pass from the furry of the seals onto the destruction of the first four trumpets, which destroys 1/3 of the
Earth. With this brief overview, we can now reconsider Horn’s calculations.




12 For my full chart, see http://misthology.org/pdf/charts/Revelation_Banner_Chart.jpg.
Wormwood and Rapture                                                                                                 Page 6
        Let us suppose that Horn is correct that these four trumpets may indicate an impact by Apophis on 4/13/2029. If
so, this is not the middle of the tribulation. Far from it. Probably about 7 years from it. My chart pictures trumpets
1-4 as being in rapid succession for a singular event, which would be in harmony with Horn’s asteroid impact
theory. But in harmony with Rev 8:1 and EGMG, my chart only allows a few weeks or months (or maybe a year or
so) after the rapture before trumpets 1-4 occur. The red arrow marks the spot. Therefore, if Horn is correct that
4/13/2029 marks the impact by Wormwood, the most probable time for the rapture would be a few months earlier,
thus the Feast of Trumpets on 9/21/2028.
        Although Horn’s theory is attractive, the unknown time of the rapture and unexpected nature of the Lord’s
return present serious problems for his proposal. The problem of unknown time does not refer to Jesus’ statement
that one knows the day or hour of His return. That statement is not a problem because this phrase is a Jewish idiom
for the Feast of Trumpets. With this statement Jesus could very well be cryptically indicating that His return will
happen on the Feast of Trumpets. A cryptic allusion to the Feast of Trumpets is a substantial possibility. Indeed, it
is one of the reasons I favor the Feast of Trumpets as the probable time for the Lord’s return.
        The primary problem with Horn’s projection is that it practically nullifies the surprise of the Lord’s return. The
Bible portrays it as being unexpected: “The day of the Lord will come just like a thief in the night” (1Thess 5:2).
“Therefore be on the alert, for you do not know which day your Lord is coming. But be sure of this, that if the head of
the house had known at what time of the night the thief was coming, he would have been on the alert” (Mt 24:42-43).
“The master of that slave will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour which he does not know”
(Mt 24:50).
        Yet Horn predicts that Apophis will be clearly anticipated by 2025. People will be able to look up into the sky and
see it coming years in advance. He even thinks that the populace may be frightened by the terrifying prospect of the
impact and even repent. However, Revelation presents a different picture, at least for those still alive at the time of the
trumpet judgments:
       20 And the rest of mankind, who were not killed by these plagues, did not repent of the works of their

       hands, so as not to worship demons, and the idols of gold and of silver and of brass and of stone and of
       wood, which can neither see nor hear nor walk; 21 and they did not repent of their murders nor of their
       sorceries nor of their immorality nor of their thefts. (Rev 9:20-21)

Granted, this text is describing those left on Earth after the rapture, and Horn is talking about those alive on Earth
before the rapture, so this text is not fatal to his thesis. Nevertheless, the Bible seems to indicate that life on Earth
will be going on pretty much as normal without anticipation of judgment:
       38 "For as in those days which were before the flood they were eating and drinking, they were marrying

       and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered the ark, 39 and they did not understand until the
       flood came and took them all away; so shall the coming of the Son of Man be. 40 "Then there shall be two
       men in the field; one will be taken, and one will be left. 41 "Two women will be grinding at the mill; one
       will be taken, and one will be left. 42 "Therefore be on the alert, for you do not know which day your Lord
       is coming. (Mt 24:38-42).

       While they are saying, "Peace and safety!" then destruction will come upon them suddenly like birth
       pangs upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape. (1Thess 5:3)

These texts in conjunction with those describing the Lord coming suddenly and unexpectantly at an unknown time do
not harmonize very easily with visibly seeing an avoidable impending judgment coming 2 to 3 years in advance. Yet
Horn acknowledges that those dwelling on Earth will see it coming for 2 to 3 years in advance and have an impending
sense of doom. Thus, he allows the possibility that the people of Earth will call upon the Lord for salvation from the
impact and be spared. 13 Such speculations run sharply counter to the above texts, thus causing major misgivings about
Horn’s proposal.
       Berner offers a counter proposal:

             While an asteroid strike can certainly be involved in the second trumpet judgment, I do not
       view that as being the most likely cause of the first trumpet. I do believe that an extreme form of

13 See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WFYo7X2hO_M&t=4s (17:07-19:50).
Wormwood and Rapture                                                                                                   Page 7
       coronal mass ejection on a direct trajectory with the earth is being depicted.
               Consider a speculative theory in terms of sequential cause and effect in terms of the transition from
       the seals to the trumpets.
               What if some celestial body (large asteroid, comet, or planet, or even something new - unknown
       to man) approaches the earth and interrupts the normal balance of the solar system. It begins to create
       havoc related to the depiction of the 6th seal - meteorite strikes, massive earthquakes, and probable pole
       shift. Instead of comprising a one-time catastrophe on a quick pass through the solar system, suppose it gets
       temporarily caught up in the celestial interplay and makes a secondary pass some relatively short period of
       time later - perhaps passing around the sun in the process. This object could unduly interact with the sun
       as well as the earth and other bodies in the solar system and be the ultimate influence causing a
       coronal mass ejection from the sun directed at the earth resulting in the first trumpet judgment. It
       could then continue, possibly even breaking up itself, and be responsible for the second trumpet as well.
               All of this could take place well before 2029 and be completely unrelated to Horn’s theory. It is
       possible that the object he is focused on may play a later catastrophic role in the sequence of events
       rather than the first four trumpet judgments. 14

        Berner’s speculative theory has many attractive elements. For that matter, I am a fan of the Planet X theory, in
which is a planet-size comet passes near Earth, which would be in accord with Berner’s proposal. One difficulty I have
reconciling Berner’s theory with Horn’s model, though, is that the two remaining trumpet judgments and the seven bowl
judgments do not sound like a large asteroid hitting the Earth, though I would not rule out the possibility of an asteroid
being part of such extensive calamity, especially part of the seventh bowl judgment (cf. Rev 16:20). Perhaps, if one just
looks at the catastrophic results and ignores the problem of timing, Apophis could “play a later catastrophic role in the
[bowl] sequence of events.” But the problem of timing is fatal to this proposal.
        Suppose this harmonization works in terms of catastrophic results. In that case, since the bowl judgments happen
near the end of the tribulation, with the seventh bowl being the last one, if Apophis hits then, according to EGMM you
would have to backtrack about 10.5+ years to derive the time of the rapture. But that would have put the rapture
back in 2018-2019. So, this harmonization fails. Apophis would have to hit earlier in the tribulation, which makes
association with Wormwood most likely.
        Other harmonization models would have to be sought. Horn was not told in the vision that Apophis is
Wormwood. He made this deduction on his own. For reasons cited above, the anticipation of impact by Apophis
probably indicates that the rapture must come two or three years in advance of the impact. Otherwise, the impending
impact would take away from the unexpected nature of the Lord’s return. If that is the case, the rapture would
probably happen by the Feast of Trumpets in 2025. The point of the vision might be to lead us to make this obvious
deduction and infer that the rapture happens by the Feast of Trumpets in 2025, before Apophis becomes a well-
known threat. Additionally, the vision might also lead us to expect an event like Apophis, not necessarily Apophis
itself. Horn himself discussed 2018 LF16 as another NEO (Near Earth Object) of interest, with a near collision date of
8/8/2023. If that is Wormwood, a Feast of Trumpets on 9/16/2023 would be too late. So, one could either opt for Pentecost
in 2023, or the Feast of Trumpets in 2022 as the most probable time for the rapture.
        By Horn’s own analysis, an impact by Apophis in 2029 is not inevitable. According to him, mankind might repent,
resulting in God’s intervention. Thus, the vision is not necessarily a picture of what will be, only what might be. It does
not show what inevitably will happen, only what could happen. Accordingly, Horn has failed to consider another
possibility that could nullify the impact. He stresses that the asteroid is too large and coming too fast for it to be derailed
by human means. His assessment may very well be true regarding conventional means. On the other hand, various writers,
such as Steve Quayle, Timothy Alberino, Joseph Farrell assert that humanity has very advanced technology being used
in Black Ops. For example, a frequent claim made among those of this persuasion is that humanity has the means of
faster than light travel. Many of the UFOs being sited are purportedly of human origin, perhaps reversed engineered from
alien technology. This possibility is exceedingly plausible. With such technology, humanity might indeed be able to
divert or destroy Apophis. Black Ops might do so either covertly or overtly. Indeed, they might attribute their intervention
to an alien savior. Frankly, since the present analysis thus far finds the current probability of the rapture to be greater
for the next four years than the following four years and does not find a suitable impact point for Apophis within
EGMM during that timeframe, an impact by Apophis is deemed improbable. Apophis will probably be a near miss
without intervention, or diverted or destroyed by human intervention, or diverted by divine intervention.
        Yet another possibility might be entertained. If the rapture is delayed until Apophis becomes a widely known

14 Personal correspondence, 3/9/2021.
Wormwood and Rapture                                                                                                     Page 8
threat and is then eliminated as a threat by either human or divine means, then the world will be crying out
exuberantly, “Peace and Safety!” The world would not expect disaster to come at that point because the foreseen
crisis has been eliminated, making this an excellent time for an unforeseen disaster, such as that conjectured by
Berner.
        To complicate matters even more, yet another scenario might be envisioned. When Apophis becomes
increasingly known as a public threat, the public may be finally informed of our Black Ops capability, which the
government has been trying to keep secret for a long time. If the world is finally told that we have the human means of
diverting or destroying Apophis, the world may believe that the government will be able to do so. Consequently, the
world would believe that “Peace and Safety” will win the day. Yet, if Black Ops wait until the last moment to make their
abilities known (since they have sought to keep them secret for so long), then they will delay taking action until the last
possible moment. Suppose that Black Ops announce that they will take action on the first of October 2028. Since all the
focus has been on Apophis, they fail to see another threat. Unbeknown to them, an unforeseen object, such as what Berner
envisions or even Planet X, hits on the Feast of Trumpets (9/21/2028). If the seal judgments occur at this point, then
the rapture does also. The global destruction caused by the breaking of the seals at this juncture could very well
prevent Black Ops from being able to act at the time they anticipated and needed. After all, these seal judgments
are so severe they destroy 1/4 of all life that remains after the rapture. Consequently, Black Ops would probably be
fatally delayed from taking the necessary action, and Apophis could hit just as Horn has anticipated. If impact happens
under such similar circumstances, the rapture could still be sudden and relatively unexpected. To be sure, prophecy buffs
holding to an EGMM would have extraordinarily strong grounds for anticipating the rapture at that time. But such a
limited expectation of the rapture is permissible. The rapture need not catch them in the dark: “You, brethren, are not in
darkness, that the day should overtake you like a thief” (1Thess 5:4).
Conclusion
        By Horn’s own admission, his vision does not show what will take place on 4/13/2029, only what might take
place. His errors in calculations and his failing to anticipate additional scenarios that seriously affect the probability
of an impact by Apophis on the projected date and the timing of the rapture undermine confidence in his projections. If
his vision actually depicts what will take place, then the most probable time of the rapture would be the Feast of Trumpets
in 2028 (or perhaps 2027). If the vision merely depicts what could take place, then the most probable time of the rapture
would be any Feast of Trumpets between now and then. However, it could take place anytime, even after that point in
time.
        Because comets have an elliptical orbit, they move much faster than asteroids. The elongated orbit of a comet
causes it to move much faster as it approaches Earth to perform its slingshot around the other side of the Sun. Bill
Broussard’s Planet 7X calculations project a return of Planet X about every 360 years, with seven years to complete its
slingshot, which he associates with the duration of the tribulation. Though much of his eschatological analysis is open to
strong rebuttal, the above aspect of his premise sounds plausible. If some such Planet X hypothesis is correct, I would
associate its return with the seal judgments and the rapture. 15 This time when Planet X returns it will pass close enough
to Earth to cause the devastation depicted by the seals.
        Since neither the timing nor projection of the 13 months for the sixth trumpet in Rev 9:15 are explicit, one could
postulate that this sixth trumpet is not opened until the last 13 months of the first half of the tribulation and runs its course
until the middle of the tribulation. Thus, one might roughly compute about 7+ years from the opening of the seals at the


15 Berner has a short appendix (Intervenes, 363-364) that cites Velikovsky’s theories in support of an inter-cosmic body

plasma discharge as possibly explaining the prophetic implications of the 6th seal and first trumpet judgments.
Velikovsky’s books provide a scientific framework that increases my openness to hypotheses such as Planet X. Gill
Broussard (www.planet7x.net) poses that Planet X returns about every 360 years and that the probability of the return of
Planet X in the near time frame decreases after 2021. His eschatology is seriously flawed, and his astronomy poses an
extremely erratic orbital cycle for Planet X, posing a return ranging from 300-700 years. See https://radiotica.com/esta-
el-planeta-7x-acercandose-a-la-tierra-astronomo-revela-su-ubicacion/. Such imprecision does not bode well for the
precision of his calculations. John Moore (www.thelibertyman.com) says Planet X was mathematically anticipated but
found by the Pioneer 10 Space Probe in 1979. He claims it has been tracked ever since and is 5-7 times the size of Earth.
It can only be seen from the southern hemisphere and in the infrared light spectrum. As Velikovsky has determined, the
water turned red in China at the same time it did in Egypt during the plagues due to Planet X. See
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9fk0a8Zvn88&list=PLZ_RlBGlIjYZvkEp_vKHIPvwTXP-TjNfE. For counter by
Michael Heiser, see https://vimeo.com/386975341.
Wormwood and Rapture                                                                                                Page 9
beginning of the Day of the Lord until the conclusion of the sixth trumpet at the middle of the tribulation. If Planet X
strikes at the opening of the seals, it could be making its trip back from the other side of the Sun at about the conclusion
of the sixth trumpet, which would correspond with the start of the Great Tribulation. If a double whammy is entailed,
such as what Berner suggested, an initial strike by Planet X followed by an impact from Apophis as Wormwood poses is
plausible. Depending on how long the heavenly silence lasts and if (or how far) one projects the opening of the trumpets
into the 3.5 years of the beginning of sorrows, a gap of several months or even several years might be anticipated between
the plasma exchange with Planet X before the impact by Apophis. One might accordingly anticipate the rapture anytime
from 2025-2028 in that case.
