                       Moral and Theological Apostasy
                                                 Updated 10/25/2009

Believers are Worse
         Is it possible to commit moral apostasy without having first committed theological apostasy? If so,
does moral apostasy in and of itself result in the loss of eternal life? The answers to such questions naturally
have a significant impact upon one’s view of apostasy. And 1Tim 5:8 (within its context and with its clearest
cross-references) provides the focal point for answering such questions The moral apostasy described in 1Tim
5:8 implements the Greek word cheiron (worse) to describe defective believers. No less than three times, this
same word is used to describe such believers as being:

   Worse than unbelievers (1Tim 5:8).
   Subject to worse punishment than rebellious OT believers (Heb 10:29).
   In a worse state than at first (2Pet 2:20).

Heb 10:29
          The passage in Hebrews deals with the case of believers who subjectively defect from the faith by
means of theological apostasy: “How much worse punishment do you think he will deserve who has trampled
under foot the Son of God, and has regarded as unclean the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified,
and has insulted the Spirit of grace?” (Heb 10:29; TM). This full-fledged from of apostasy marks the defector
as having completely departed from the faith. An Arminian will assert that such a person is no longer a
believer,1 loses eternal life, and will be worse off in hell than his OT counterparts. To Forlines’ credit, he
attempts to limit the loss of eternal life to theological apostasy so that he can affirm that salvation is by faith
alone.2 But in light of the other two passages cited above, his attempt to maintain salvation by faith alone by
restricting the forfeiture of eternal life to theological apostasy is open to serious question.

2Pet 2:20
         In the other two passages, believers defect from the faith in a practical manner while still remaining in
the faith in terms of theological profession. They still believe in Christ, but for all practical purposes they deny
Christ by the way they live. In 2Pet 2:20, for example, believers become morally entangled after having
morally escaped: “For if after they have escaped the defilements of the world by the knowledge of the Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled in them and are overcome, the last state has become worse
for them than the first.” However, the text does not indicate that their moral failure had necessarily ensued
from a complete theological departure from the faith. Thus, this practical apostasy does not appear as
thoroughgoing as the theological apostasy described in the book of Hebrews. But the observation that moral
apostasy does not necessarily mark subjective departure from the faith discredits Forlines’ noble attempt to
limit the loss of regeneration to the lack of perseverance in faith.
         The majority opinion among Arminians, as expressed by Shank and Marshall, co-conditions the
retention of regeneration on perseverance in faithfulness. This majority perspective in the Arminian camp is
superior exegetically to Forlines’ attempt to condition the retention of regeneration to perseverance in faith
alone.3 Of course, Forlines would agree with his Arminian counterparts that moral apostates are spiritually
dead, but where he would part company with his fellow conditionalists is in placing moral defection after
theological departure. In other words, Forlines’ hypothesis presumes that the moral apostates have already
defected from the faith theologically. By placing moral apostasy after theological apostasy, he hopes to avoid
the conclusion that he is teaching moral security—a security conditioned on one’s morality. Instead, he wants
to be perceived as conditioning salvation on faith alone.
         However, the assumption that moral apostasy was preceded by theological apostasy in 2Pet 2:20 must
be read into the text rather than from it. One could just as easily maintain that the moral apostates in this
passage simply followed the example of the false teachers in turning the grace of God into licentiousness (cp.
Jude 1:4). The postulation that these morally entangled believers abandoned the faith itself is without
                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
foundation, much less that they had abandoned the faith before becoming entangled in this moral web of lies.
The more reasonable supposition is that these believers are simply denying the Master morally rather than
theologically. To speak idiomatically, they want to have their cake and eat it too. They simultaneously want
the grace of God and the pleasure of sin. As a result, they have abandoned the faith morally but not their faith
theologically. They had not abandoned the doctrine of salvation by grace through faith alone. On the contrary,
they were standing firm in the doctrine of salvation by grace through faith, but they were abusing it. They
thought it was quite alright if that faith were alone. But they were quite mistaken.
         Conditionalists would criticize such believers as being guilty of carnal security. At the very least,
those in the conditionalistic camp insist that so-called carnal Christians cannot be sure of their salvation. More
often than not, conditionalists will further insist that carnal security is false security, that those believers living
in a carnal lifestyle were either not saved or have lost their salvation. Gross immorality must be avoided by
those believers who hope to make it to heaven. Marrowists would criticize conditionalists as trying to offset
carnal security with moral security. Conditionalism is rejected in Marrowism as teaching salvation by works in
the guise of moral performance. Forlines endeavors to avoid this criticism by limiting his conditionalism to
perseverance in faith. One loses eternal life by defecting from the faith. Gross moral failure may follow, but
the moral apostate has already lost eternal life when he defected from the faith. By means of this argument,
Forlines intends to condition one’s security on faith alone.

1Tim 5:8
        Forlines’ sequence stumbles badly, however, when it encounters the third text: “But if anyone does
not provide for his own, and especially for those of his household, he has denied the faith and is worse than an
unbeliever” (1Tim 5:8). The crucial questions are: “In what sense has this apostate denied, repudiated,
disowned (arneomai) the faith? Is the person in question no longer a believer or no longer considered a
believer?” The weight of the evidence is decisively opposed to Forlines’ imposition upon the doctrine of moral
apostasy.

                                                    The Faith
         Like Forlines, Lenski shares the Arminian perspective that apostates lose eternal life. Nevertheless,
Lenski concurs with our assessment that the person in question in 1Tim 5:8 is a believer: “Paul does not say
that he has lost his faith” (bold mine).4 What the moral apostate abandons is the faith not his faith (i.e., this
apostate departs from the objective faith not his subjective faith). Lenski bases this assessment in part upon the
articular construction of the term. Granted, the articular construction was used earlier in the epistle (1Tim 1:19)
to refer to an objective apostasy that entails subjective apostasy where some apostates suffered shipwreck of
the faith and in doing so lost their faith (NAS). Their objective apostasy was theologically subjective.
However, the apostasy in 1Tim 5:8 is explicitly limited by Paul to the moral arena. The moral apostate on this
occasion does not lose his faith—his faith remains theologically and subjectively intact. This particular
morally dysfunctional believer is still a believer.
         Given a premise of eternal security, the securitist would assume that even though this carnal believer
acts worse than the unsaved, this carnal believer remains saved. But Shank appeals to the context to object to
Chafer’s listing 1Tim 5:8 as a proof text for eternal security. One can certainly understand Shank’s
consternation. Is the securitist not begging the question by assuming that the carnal believer is still saved when
just two verses earlier Paul affirms that the moral apostate is dead? According to Arminians such as Lenski,
Marshall, Shank, the moral apostate in 1Tim 5:6 is spiritually dead. So how can advocates of eternal security
ignore the obvious implication of the context which implies that the moral apostate in 1Tim 5:8 is spiritually
dead as well?
         Our objective is to use the Arminian argument as advanced by Lenski, Marshall, and Shank to limit
the number of contenders on the playing field. By momentarily adopting their premise of conditional security,
we will thoroughly dispense with Forlines’ hypothesis that moral defection is necessarily preceded by
theological defection.



                               For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                  Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                  Worse Than
          Paul explicitly states that the moral apostate in 5:8 is worse than an unbeliever. Paul is not making a
nonsensical statement to the effect that the person is an unbeliever who is worse than an unbeliever. After all,
how could an unbeliever be worse than and unbeliever? Or as Hart aptly expresses it: “One cannot be an
unbeliever and be worse than an unbeliever at the same time!”5 Paul’s contrastive use of cheiron (worse)
demands that this moral apostate be regarded as a believer. Marshall acknowledges that the moral apostate is a
nominal believer. Of course, for Marshall this means that the person is now a believer in name only. This
perspective might be expressed by describing such a believer as being a shell of the person he was before he
committed moral apostasy. The moral apostate no longer has eternal life within him, so he is an empty shell.
Even so, by Marshall’s own admission, moral apostates are nominal believers and therefore still bear the name
believer.6 Hence, such a person still believes in Christ. Therefore, on the basis of Lenski’s articular observation
and even more so on the basis of Marshall’s nominal admission, it may be deduced that the person in this text
is still implicitly regarded by Paul as having faith in Christ. But this observation drives a stake in the heart of
Forlines’ argument.

                                               Arminian Death
         Marshall and Shank cite 1Tim 5:8 in conjunction with its contextual equivalent in 1Tim 5:6 to indicate
that a believer who becomes morally worse than an unbeliever becomes spiritually dead (i.e., unregenerate).
Although moral apostasy is considered a practical (rather than theological) denial of the faith by advocates of
this persuasion, moral apostasy is nevertheless regarded as being just as soteriological lethal. Believers who
subcomes to moral apostasy lose eternal life, and according to Shank, they may quite possibly loses it without
even knowing it. Such believers still have faith, but it is no longer saving faith. Since saving faith is generally
perceived by insecuritists as consisting of perseverance in faith-works, moral defection from works is thought
to be just as deadly as theological defection from the faith. After all, faith without works is dead (Jam 2:17).
So according to Arminians, a person who has faith but no longer has works is no longer saved. Being dead is
thus made equivalent to being unsaved. This composite Arminian approach demolishes Forlines’ argument that
eternal security can be conditioned on perseverance in faith alone.

                                         Composite Arminian Argument
    1. Moral apostates are spiritually dead (1Tim 5:6).
    2. Theological believers can be moral apostates (1Tim 5:8).
    3. Therefore, theological believers can be moral apostates and lose eternal life without losing their faith
       since they are still theological believers.

         Basically, by pitting Lenski, Marshall, and Shank against Forlines, we have been able to use their
contestation to destroy Forlines’ contention that Arminian security can be conditioned on perseverance in faith
alone. Far to the contrary, when considered exegetically and if given logical consistency, Arminian security
necessarily conditions eternal security on perseverance in both faith and works. The loss of eternal life cannot
be limited to theological apostasy. Moral apostasy may occur before theological apostasy. And if moral
apostasy occurs first, the apostate loses eternal life before he loses his faith. Conditionalists cannot affirm
salvation by faith alone. They must avow salvation by faith-works.

                                                    Moral Denial
         Having established that Arminians must condition their salvation on both faith and works (a point
which is readily evident in mainstream Arminianism anyway), we will now turn our attention to Shank’s
contestation that the loss of eternal life is contextually in view when Paul says that moral apostates have denied
the faith. Paul uses deny (arneomai) again in Tit 1:16 in a related example regarding moral apostasy: “They
[morally apostate believers] profess to know God, but by their deeds they deny Him.” As far as such believers
are concerned, they do not disown God. It is by their deeds rather than their lips deny Christ. A moral denial
rather than a theological denial is clearly intended by Paul here. In view of 1Tim 5:8, she presumption should
be that Paul regards these moral apostates in Tit 1:16 as still believing in Christ since he limits their denial to
their works.
                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                   By Works
         The Greek word for deeds is ergon, which is the typical Greek word for works. The expression by
works in Tit 1:16 is a dative of means, which means that works are the instrumental means by which the moral
apostate denies Christ. For example, when Paul says that “a man is justified by faith apart from works” (Rom
3:28), he likewise uses the dative of means to show that faith is the instrumental means by which we are saved.
Since it is by works that the professing believer denies Christ in Tit 1:16, and since it is by this ergonic denial
that the moral apostate loses his salvation in Arminianism, the Arminian is found to be teaching salvation by
works. Arminianism twists itself into many pitiful knots in trying to assert that we are saved by faith apart
from works but unsaved by works.7
         Misthology, in contrast, does not have any problem with ergonic salvation because it recognizes that a
salvation by faith apart from works cannot be equated with a salvation by faith and works. The later is ergonic,
the former is not. But this recourse is not available to the Arminian. The only hope Arminianism had in this
discussion of moral apostasy by which to maintain salvation by faith alone was the minority opinion offered by
Forlines. However, the majority opinion among Arminians obliterates that hope because the mainstream
perception correctly deduces that moral apostasy may predate theological apostasy. The expression, “He was
dead before he hit the floor,” may be aptly applied to the moral apostate, “He was dead before his faith hit the
floor.” As far as Paul is concerned in 1Tim 5:8 (and probably in Tit 1:16), the believer who fails morally is still
a believer theologically. According to the Arminian, such a believer dies spiritually. Consequently, for the
Arminian, morality is the means to immortality. The Arminian antidote to carnal security is moral security.
This statement holds true even for those Arminians who may try to take Forlines’ approach. We have
demonstrated this deduction by examining 1Tim 5:8, but in Mere Christianity and Moral Christianity we take
a completely different tract by which to document this fact from the pen of C. S. Lewis.8

                                                   Profession
          A word, and only a word, needs be said regarding the Reformed camp in regard to moral apostasy. In
their attempt to try to explain away the enigma that exists between conditional security and morality, those in
the Reformed camp seize upon the word profess in Tit 1:16: “They profess to know God, but by their works
they deny Him” (TM). The Reformed quip will be, “Moral apostates are professors not possessors of eternal
life. By means of their works, moral apostates necessarily nullify their profession and demonstrate their lack of
possession.” Bottom line, the Reformed tactic is to deny that those who morally deny the faith were ever saved
in the beginning. Perhaps such a tactic might be plausible in Tit 1:16, but one would have to bury one’s head in
the sand to ignore the fact that the apostate was indeed a genuine believer in the related cross-reference of
1Tim 5:8.
          While it is the moral apostate who professes to be a believer in Tit 1:16, it is Paul who professes that
the moral apostate is a believer in 1Tim 5:8. By acknowledging that the moral apostate is worse than an
unbeliever, Paul implicitly refuses to (necessarily) regard the moral apostate as an unbeliever. To the contrary,
Paul matter-of-factly regards the moral apostate as a believer in that verse. Hendriksen is therefore in error
when he asseverates: “Lack of positive action, the sin of omission, gives the lie to his profession of faith
(subjective sense).”9 To the contrary, Lenski is correct to reject the notion of subjective apostasy in this
passage. In any event, the implicit profession of subjective faith on the part of the apostate comes from the pen
of Paul, not merely from the lips of the apostate. To be sure, there is an incongruity between lips and life of the
moral apostate in Tit 1:16, but it is not a soteriological incongruity between his profession and possession of
eternal life. Paul denies that the moral apostate in that passage knows God. Even if one were to define eternal
life as knowing God (Jn 17:3), one would still have to discuss the potential difference between having eternal
life and experiencing it. But even apart from such considerations, Paul’s statement need not be construed as
meaning soteric knowledge. Carnal Christians do not know God the same way that Paul knows God. Certainly,
immature believers do not have the same knowledge of God that mature believers do.10

                                                Silent Killer
         When 1Tim 5:8 and Tit 1:16 are viewed jointly, it becomes apparent that moral apostasy may result
from either sins of omission or sins of comission. The believer who has fallen into moral apostasy may still be
sincerely professing to know God and thereby reveal that he is not even aware that he has committed apostasy.
                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
As Shank correctly notes: “He still professes faith, and all seems well to him. He is quite unaware of his
apostasy.”11 This Arminian argument by Shank refutes the Arminian argument by Forlines that life-stealing
apostasy is limited to willful, presumptuous, high-handed sins. All forms of apostasy are deadly. The believer
who subcomes to moral apostasy is a living corpse even though she (1Tim 5:6) or he (1Tim 5:8) still believes
in Christ for eternal life.
          McCoy also suggests that moral apostasy is the subject matter in another related passage:
“Specifically in 2 Tim 2:12b the denial in view is not a single act of denial of sinful selfishness but is rather
descriptive of a general failure or breakdown in discipleship.”12 Even those believers who deny Christ by
simply living a life that demonstrates a general failure in discipleship will be denied by Christ. If a believer
slowly retrogresses morally, who is to say at what point along the way that such a believer loses his or her
spiritual vitality. Would it not be a slow, imperceptible death as Shank maintains? We cannot agree with Shank
that such a death would be soteriological, but we can certainly agree with him that it could be imperceptible.13

                                            Half-Hearted Security
         A half-hearted affirmation of conditional security, such as that offered by Forlines, is hardly adequate
to deal with the observations that come from a careful study regarding the ramifications of moral apostasy. The
full-fledged conditional security provided by the advocates of the majority opinion is much truer to the texts
dealing with such apostasy. The death dealing effects of apostasy cannot be limited to theological apostasy or
to high-handed sins. The arguments provided by Lenski, Marshall, and Shank are also superior to the half-
hearted attempt at eternal security found in the Reformed camp. One cannot stand on the sidelines and claim
that the only people susceptible to moral apostasy are those who falsely profess to have faith in Christ. If one is
going to actually enter into the arena to contend for the faith, where the text stands as referee, one must admit
that Paul is the one legitimately professing that genuine believers may subcome to moral apostasy.

                                         Heavy Weight Contenders
         Lightweight contenders, such as Forlines and Hendriksen, have already been disqualified from
stepping into this heavyweight ring to engage in exegetically battle regarding the impact of moral apostasy.
Only two heavyweight contenders are exegetically qualified to face off in this hermeneutical matchup between
NOSAS and OSAS. Full-fledged conditional security stands in one corner, while full-fledged unconditional
security is chomping at the bit in the other corner.

                                      The Death of Eternal Life is Contested




At the opening bell, Lenski immediately launches a NOSAS jab: “The spiritual life in her died.” 14 But this
comment opens Lenski up to an immediate counterpunch by OSAS: “How can eternal life die?” After this
almost devastating right cross, the sports announcer hurriedly informs the fans: “This spiritual life is eternal
life.” In the ensuing flurry of punches from OSAS which follow, OSAS asks pounding questions, such as,
“Why must being dead signify loss of regeneration in either 1Tim 5:6 or Jam 2:17? Why could it not simply
                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
signify practical death, familial death, soulical death, dynamic death, or misthological death?15 Why must
denial of Christ by works in 2Tim 2:12 result in a denial by Christ of faith?” At the conclusion of the fight,
everyone agreed that it was a well fought and well worth attending.

Conclusion
This study has focused on the broader significance regarding the case of moral apostasy in 1Tim 5:8 and its
death dealing impact affirmed two verses earlier in 1Tim 5:6 to conclude that the moral apostasy in 1Tim 5:8
results in the moral death described in 1Tim 5:6 so that Forlines cannot limit the deadly affects of apostasy to
theological apostasy. Therefore, the deadly affects of apostasy must ultimately be based on morality.16 The
half-hearted attempts at unconditional security and conditional security by the Reformed camp and by some in
the Arminian camp respectively have been found too seriously flawed within spectrum of this discussion to be
allowed serious contention. They are not serious contenders. The only exegetically valid alternatives when
studying these texts are full-fledged conditional security versus full-fledged unconditional security found in
two opposing camps. The conditionalistic camp finds representation by Lenski, Marshall, and Shank. The
unconditional camp finds representatives in writings of Hart, McCoy, and the present author. A full-fledged
fight on the part of the present author should be well worth the price of the admission ticket but will have to
await the publication of his two books: The Outer Darkness and Mere Christianity and Moral Christianity.
Until such time, the following exegetical possibilities offered by OSAS for the three primary passages dealing
with cheiron may be noted:

   Morally apostate believers are worse than unbelievers in the way they act (1Tim 5:8).
   Theologically apostate believers are temporally and misthologically worse off than OT believers who
suffered a quick, temporal death (Heb 10:29).
    Morally apostate believers are temporally worse than and misthologically worse off than they were as
immature believers when they first came to faith (2Pet 2:20).

1
  Although we contend that even the theological apostate may still be regarded a believer in some sense of the word,
we concur with the Arminian that such an apostate no longer consciously believes in Christ.
2
  See discussion in The Outer Darkness for citations and further weakness.
3
  Shank (Life in Son, 192, 335) and Marshall (Kept, 129) are clear Arminian examples of exegetes who condition the
retention of regeneration on a believer’s perseverance in good works.
4
  Lenski, First Timothy, 664.
5
  John F. Hart, “Why Confess Christ? The Use and Abuse of Romans 10:9-10.” JOTGES 12:23
(Autumn1999): 9-10, n. 20.
6
  Since the moral apostate still implicitly bears the name believer in 1Tim 5:8, the Arminian must either concede that
the person in question is a nominal believer and thus still believes in Christ, or the Arminian must concede to our
argument as given elsewhere that a person remains a believer even if he ceases to believe! Since we have used the
latter argument in Outer Darkness to defend OSAS, we will limit our response herein to the ground already
conceded by Marshall in the former option.
7
  For demonstrations of the knots into which Shank ties himself, see the present author’s book The Outer Darkness.
8
  For arguments against using morality as a means to immortality, see the present author’s book Mere Christianity
and Moral Christianity. As will be seen in that discussion, even if Forlines were successful in evading the
assessment of his fellow Arminians who directly condition retention of regeneration on one’s moral performance, he
would still have to contend with the admission of other Arminians that perseverance in faith is a moral virtue. In
order to prove that he does not condition salvation on moral virtue, he would have to disprove the affirmation that
perseverance in faith is a moral virtue. But there again, we join hands with Forlines’ fellow Arminians in
demonstrating that perseverance in faith is a moral virtue. He cannot win for losing. Even if Arminian security could
be shown not to be conditioned on moral apostasy, it would still be conditioned on perseverance in faith, which is a
moral virtue. Arminians trip all over one another in trying to avoid the implications of their theology. Morality is the
means to immortality in Arminianism. One simply cannot condition salvation on faith alone while simultaneously
conditioning salvation on perseverance in faith. Moral virtue, merit, and works will slip in through the door of
perseverance.
                               For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                  Misthologist@misthology.org
9
  Hendriksen, 1 Timothy, 171. Emphasis his.
10
   See “Know God” in The Outer Darkness for substantiation.
11
   Shank, Life, 200.
12
   Brad McCoy “Secure Yet Scrutinized: 2 Timothy 2:11-13.” JOTGES 1:1 (Autumn 1988): 28.
13
   Among other things, we cannot agree with Shank that loss of regeneration would be imperceptible because we do
not believe that it can only be partial. One cannot be a little bit born again anymore than one can be a little bit
pregnant. One is either pregnant or one is not. One either has spiritual life or one does not. But we do admit that
believers can be half-dead, mostly dead, or even completely death when it comes to living life by the power of the
Spirit. Our experience of the life-giving power of the Spirit is certainly capable of fluctuation.
14
   Lenski, 661.
15
   See Static Versus Dynamic Life for our affirmation that a believer is subject to various forms of death as a result
of moral failure.
16
   C. S. Lewis perceptively anticipated that Arminianism would reduce to a preservation based on perseverance in
faith as a moral virtue. But his argument for moral security is answered in Mere Christianity and Moral Christianity.




                               For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                  Misthologist@misthology.org
