                                                     Ordo Salutis
                                                         Revised 1/12/2008
                                                  The Heart of Ordo Salutis
                          1                        2                       3                       4                 Writer
                                                                                                                   Forlines, Harrison,
             A          Faith             Justification           Regeneration Eternal Life                         Picirilli, Wuest

                                                                                                                 Chafer/DTS/Walvoord,
             B          Faith            Regeneration              Eternal Life            Justification          Demarest, Erickson,
                                                                                                                         Hodges
                                                                                                                    Berkhof, Calvin,
             C Regeneration                     Faith              Eternal Life            Justification          Gilliard, Hendriksen,
                                                                                                                 Hoeksema, Snoeberger
                                                                                                                         Boice
             D Regeneration Eternal Life                                 Faith             Justification

             E Regeneration Eternal Life                           Justification                Faith


                                                        Categories
Ordo Salutis (Order of Salvation) is understood differently by various groups and is more comprehensive than the
three to four categories above: faith, justification, and regeneration (eternal life). Nevertheless, these categories are at
the heart of the debate and will suffice for our discussion at present. According to the Calvinists pictured in Row C,
regeneration and the impartation of eternal life occur in two phases. These two phases are supposedly distinguishable
something along the following lines:

 regeneration (gennao: subconscious masculine insemination, e.g. Jn 1:13; 1Jn 3:9)
 eternal life (anagennao: conscious feminine germination of new birth; e.g. Jam 1:18; 1Pet 1:23).
                                                          Rows
The above chart is a modification of one which I originally posted in the GES Eternal Security forum on November
08, 2006. This modification now includes a corresponding Writer’s column. A new Row A has been inserted at the
top to represent a non-Calvinistic position which is completely opposed to the standard Calvinistic Ordo Salutis. The
Calvinistic arrow in the left hand column does not span all of Row B because there are non-Calvinists as well as
moderate Calvinists who may opt for Row-B. The non-Calvinists in Row B would be inclined to see a general
prevenient grace which enables all (who hear the gospel) to believe, while a Calvinist would be more inclined to limit
it to a irresistible particular grace made available only to the elect. Rows B-E become increasing Calvinistic as one
proceeds down the chart. A rule-of-thumb summation of the rows is as follows:

    A.  Arminianism (and Marrowism)
    B.  Moderate Calvinism (and Dispensationalism along with some non-Calvinists)
    C.  Scholastic Calvinism
    D.  Popular Calvinism
    E.  Hyper Calvinism
                                                   Heart of Question
“Can a lost person receive Christ?” is the question at the heart of this discussion. Of course, Jn 1:12 must be regarded
as a key verse in dealing with the question since it seems to suggest an affirmative response with a complete and
conclusive ordo in terms of the above chart. This verse is also contextually related to one of the four principle
Calvinistic proof texts above (i.e., Jn 1:13). We will therefore begin our investigation with the context of this verse.
                              For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                    For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                     Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                        Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                        Flow of Context
5
  And the light shines in the
darkness, and the darkness did not                                                     came/coming
appropriate it. 6 There came a man,
sent from God, whose name was
John. 7 He came for a witness, in
order that he might bear witness of                                    shines/bear witness/enlightens/was in

the light, in order that all might
believe through him. 8 He was not
the light, but came in order that he                                  the darkness, all, the world, every man
might bear witness of the light.
9
  There was the true light which,
coming into the world, enlightens
every man. 10 He was in the world,
and the world was made through                                                                                     as many as
Him, and the world did not know
Him. 11 He came to His own, and
those who were His own did not                                 did not
                                                                                                                received/believed
receive Him. 12 But as many as                         appropriate/know/receive
received Him, to them (to those who
believed in His name) He gave the
right to become children of God,                                                                                 gave the right
13
   who were born not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God. (Jn 1:5-13; TM)                                                                               to become
                                                                                                          children of God/born of God
              Color Scheme:
•    Green—progression of light
•    Yellow—scope of light
•    Red—negative response to light
•    Dark Blue—positive response to light
•    Cyan—result of light

                        The logical order indicated by hina (in order) in vv. 7-8 is that John the Baptist (1) came (2)
    came/coming         in order to bear witness (3) in order that all might believe through his witness. This same order
                        is demonstrated in our flowchart. A parallel sequence is perceivable concerning the light since
                        its (1) coming (2) enlightens (3) every man so that he may believe. This order of events
anticipates a non-Calvinistic conclusion: general prevenient grace makes it possible for anyone exposed to it to
believe. This perception would be in harmony with either Row A or a non-Calvinistic approach to Row B.

The first box (came/coming) in our flow chart refers jointly to John the Baptist who came to bear witness of the light
(v. 6-8) and to coming of the light itself (v. 9). The light (Jesus) and light bearer (John the Baptist) take the initiative
in invading the realm of darkness. In the incarnation Christ came to this dark world and still shines forth as light as a
result. The logical sequence then is came then shines. The flow chart represents this sequence of events by putting
came and shines into two consecutive green boxes.

                                                             The second green box consequently denotes the immediate and
    shines/bear witness/enlightens/was in                    joint purpose of Jesus and John the Baptist. They came to shine
                                                             in the darkness and in doing so enlighten every man by bearing
                                                             witness to the fact that the light was now in the world.
                             For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                   For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                        Contrary to Calvinistic expectations, this venture by the light is
the darkness, all, the world, every man                 portrayed as universal (all) and particular (every). The light
                                                        shines in the darkness, even in those parts of the darkness that
                                                        reject it, and enlightens every man whom it encounters. Just as
light from a city on a hill does not transform the valley into light but pierces the darkness so that even those standing
at a distance in the darkness may see the light, so the light invades the realm of darkness. The implication is that when
the light of the world, as Jesus refers to Himself (Jn 8:12; 9:5), is shown throughout the world, even to those who
reject Him, He enlightens every man in the world who is exposed to it.

                                              They Really Might Believe
The parallelism leads us to conclude that everyone who is exposed to the message through the witness bearer is also
enlightened by the light and has experienced the shining of the light. This enlightenment makes it possible, not
inevitable, for those in the darkness to respond favorably to the light. We therefore find an implicit affirmation of
universal enablement (of the type expected in Row A or a non-Calvinistic view of Row B) in this transition from the
green to yellow boxes in our flow chart. John bore witness in order that all might believe. The most natural reading
consequently is that all to whom John bore witness might believe. His witness made it possible for them to believe. In
this manner, every person who encountered the message of the incarnate light was enlightened. Cloud is justified in
summarizing: “The sinner, being given light from Christ (Jn. 1:9) and being drawn by Christ (Jn. 12:32) and being
convicted and enlightened by the Holy Spirit (Jn. 16:8) can, because of this gracious divine enablement, either believe
on Christ or not” (Calvinism, 41).

                                                      Relative All
The Calvinistic attempt to evade this conclusion by assuming that (since every does not mean every individual in the
earth) every must simply refer to the ethnic inclusion of Gentiles with the Jews fails to do justice to the scope of the
parallelism. The point of the context is not ethnic inclusion but combined universalism and individualism. Everyone
exposed to the light was enlightened by the light and thereby enabled by the light to respond individually to the light.
The light puts everyone who encounters it on the spot. They are put on the spotlight and must either turn away from
the light or turn toward it. There are no exceptions. The impact of the light is not merely that all who are exposed by
it are enlightened without distinction. More than that, all those exposed are enlightened without exception. That the
all is relative rather than absolute does not mean that it is merely ethnic. On the contrary, this relative all means that
although those in the world who never heard the message of the incarnation are not enlightened by it, each and every
person in the world who does hear it is enlightened by it and enabled by it to respond to it.

                                                     No Mere Truism
Lenski (John, 52-53) appeals to Augustine and Luther in an attempt to reduce the impact of the text to simply signify
that Jesus is the only light by which men are enlightened. Lenski denies that all who are exposed to the light are
enlightened by it since some reject the light. However, this attempt virtually reduces the text to a truism, as if it
merely said, “The light enlightens all who are enlightened.” Those trying to keep the will in bondage by such
maneuvers are strong-arming the text and putting it in bondage to their theology. The flow of the context rises above
merely affirming that the logos is the light which enlightens men. Just as “all things came into being by Him and
apart from Him nothing came into being that has come into being” (1:3), so all men exposed to the light are
enlightened by the light and apart from Him no one is enlightened since He is the true light. Verse 9 does not merely
affirm that Jesus is the true light; it also affirms that He enlightens every man. To affirm the implications of the
former while denying the ramifications of the latter is to do an injustice to the text. The light shines in the darkness
and in doing so enlightens all those therein whom it encounters. Even Lenski admits this scope of the enlightenment
when he reaches as many as in 1:12. John knows nothing of a person who encounters the light but who is not
immediately put in the spotlight of personal crises as to whether or not he will reject or receive the light. As John
demonstrates in the personage of Pilate, there is no neutrality in one’s response to the light. Granted, most of those
who are enlightened by the light reject it and are hardened as a result of their rejection. Even Pilate eventually comes
to the place where his rejection of the light causes him to consent to the demand to crucify the light.



                             For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                   For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
                                           Although the light enlightened all within the darkness whom it encountered,
           did not
                                           the overwhelming response to the light by those in the darkness was
   appropriate/know/receive                negative. Nevertheless (homos) some believed. This is the word John used to
                                           describe the similar reaction in Jn 12:42. The homos of the epilogue is
parallel in that respect to the hosos of the prologue. God judicially blinded the hearts of those who rejected the light
so that they could not believe (12:39). Naturally, if those in the darkness could not believe by simple virtue of the fact
that they were in the darkness, God would not have had to judicially harden their hearts to prevent them from
believing as He did in Jn 12:40. God counteracted the natural enablement imparted by the light so that those who
rejected the light could not believe in it despite the illuminating power it continued to generate. This explains why
they could not subsequently believe. Nevertheless some responded positively to luminary power the light But why did
some respond positively while others did not? John provides the answer to that question in 1:12.

                   The transition to as many as (hosos) in the flowchart marks the transition to v. 12 where John
 as many as       moves from the overall negative response by those who in the darkness who rejected the light to
                  the limited positive response by those who in the darkness who embraced the light. Even
                  Hendriksen (a Row-C Calvinist) acknowledges, “The expression ‘as many as’ amounts to
whosoever”” (John, 80). Granted, he only mentions a ethnic implication when he adds, “whether Jew or Gentile.” But
there is much more to this implicit whosoever than mere ethnic inclusiveness.

                                           Whosoever > Ethnic Inclusiveness
As Lenski acknowledges, there is more to v. 12 than just a truism that all believers believed in Him. Lenski should
have likewise perceived that v. 9 means more than all who are enlightened by Him are enlightened by Him. Lenski
was on target with his initial assessment of v. 9 that there is more to it than such simplistic reductionism: “In reality
this individual acceptance denotes universalism, that ‘whosoever believeth’” (cp. Jn 3:15-16). “Thus ‘as many as’
opens the door to all men in the world” (John, 59; emphasis his). The enlightenment and witness is sufficient for all to
believe but is efficient only for the hosos (≈ whosoever will). Contrary to Augustine, the efficiency of the light is not
determined by the light so that only the elect can be saved but by the response of the enlightened. So why it is that
some believe while others do not? Because those enlightened by the light determine their own response to the light.
Hosos is equivalent to the whosoever-will-may-come invitation in Rev 22:17. The problem is that most will not
because they will not to do so. In this play on the word will, it may be said, “They will not because they will not.”
They do not believe in the light because they choose not to do so.

                                              Pronominal Determination
                                                                             e w ho l e
The hosos determines who will be given the right to
become children of God. By their own will, they
                                                                       es th                 w
determine whether or not they will come to the light
                                                                   s s                         or
in order to become children of God. It is incumbent
                                                                p a
upon them to receive the light in order to be given                        darkness
                                                                                                                                   ld
                                                                        m




the right. The logical order is: receive → given.                                                                                         w
                                                                   co




Hendriksen rejects the attempts of his fellow
                                                                                                                                          it h
                                                                  world
                                                              b i l i t y en




Calvinists (such as Morris) to invert the order. At the
same time, he attempts to avoid a non-Calvinistic                                           all
                                                                                                                                              in its scope

conclusion by claiming that there is no order since
both the giving and receiving happen at the same                                 willing wit
                                                                             the             h
time. Nice try. But this approach fails on several
                                                                                                                           in
                                                                                               es




accounts.                                                   every
                                                                                                                                its
                                                                  aila




                                                                                            m s c r ib




                                                                                                                                boundar




Hendriksen pointed out Aramaic nature of the idiom:                                                           as many as
                                                                v




as many as…to them (hosos…autos). Unfortunately,
                                                                                               rcu
                                                               A




                                                                                                                                                          .




what he failed to mention is that the former (hosos)
                                                                                             ci




                                                                                                                                ie




naturally determines the scope of the latter (autos)                                                     ty            i
                                                                                                                           s.
and normally determines the logical sequence as                                                               Receptiv
well. For example, “As long as [hosos] they have the
bridegroom with them [autos], they cannot fast
                             For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                   For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
(Mk 2:19; NKJ). Their fasting does not determine how long the bridegroom will stay with them. Quite the contrary,
their having the bridegroom with them (hosos) determines how long they cannot fast. So in Jn 1:12, as many as
believed in Him became children of God. The order is not: “As many as became children of God believed in Him.”
The scope of how many will become children of God is determined by the response of the as many as. Their
reception of the light determines whether or not God will make them children of God.

We may consult Mk 6:56 for another syntactical parallel: “As many as [hosos] touched Him [autos] were made well.”
Jesus was not seeking opportunities to limit the numbers of those who touched Him in this context. To the contrary,
they were seeking every available opportunity to touch him as He publicly walked and taught among them. The
limitations were imposed by their own ability and desire to touch Him. But more to the point, even though they may
have been healed the very moment they touched Jesus, their being made well did not determine that they would touch
Him. Obviously, the opposite is true. They determined whether or not they would touch Him and in so doing
determined whether or not they would be healed. Likewise, in relation to Jn 1:12, their receiving Him determined
who would become a child of God. Who would become a child of God did not determine who would receive Him.

In Lk 4:40 we have a similar structure: “As many as were sick with various diseases were brought to Him” (TM).
Their being brought to Him did not determine who was sick. Rather, they were brought to Him because they were
already sick. The former preceded the latter both logically and temporally. Again in Luke, “as many as do not receive
you…shake off the dust from your feet as a testimony against them” (Lk 9:5). You do not shake off the dust from
your feet in order to make people reject you. On the contrary, the proper order is that you shake off the dust because
you have already been rejected. Similarly, Paul writes, “As many as walk according to this rule, peace and mercy be
upon them” (Gal 6:16). They determine their walk, and their walk in turn determines whether or not the blessing
applies to them.

                                                      Receive → Given
                                             While it is true that the gift is received in the same moment it is given, it is
                                             misleading to pretend that this rules out logical sequence. Calvinists, of all
                                             people, should have no problem recognizing that just because a set of
                                             actions or decisions take place at the same time, this does not rule out
                                             logical sequence. Their whole theology is based upon the logical order of
                                             decrees given outside of time with only logical succession.

                                             In this context, the limiting factor as to the effectiveness of light in
                                             producing children of light is the receptivity of those in the darkness. All
                                             those enlightened by the light are thereby enabled to respond to the light
                                             either positively or negatively. The limiting factor in such an encounter is
                                             not the availability of light but the response to the light.

                                             In the illustration, the number of gifts received is governed by the receivers
                                             not by the giver because the giver has made the gift available to all so that
                                             all might receive it (cp. Jn 1:7). Availability (on the part of the giver)
                                             provides ability (on the part of the receiver). The person on the receiving
                                             end of the offer in this context is able to either accept or reject the offer.
                                             The intended recipient determines whether or not the offer will be effective.
                                             It is the offer of the gift (thus enlightenment), not the giving of the gift
                                             (regeneration), that makes it possible to receive the gift (of regeneration).
                                             The logical order therefore is: offered → received → given.

In the flow of the context, John has already presented the offer and demonstrated the logical order of the negative
response: offered → rejected. Now, he addresses the logical order for those who embrace the light. The light was
present in the word, shining and enlightening everyone it encountered so that all might believe. Verse 12 simply
continues and completes the parallel logical order of the positive response from the context of offered → received →
given. The light was already offered in the context. Therefore, the abbreviated order in v. 12 is: receive → given. The
combined contextual order is: offered → received → given
                            For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                  For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                   Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                      Misthologist@misthology.org
Not only does John’s choice of syntax indicate that the former (hosos) logically precedes the former (autos) in
determining who will experience the benefit, his verb choice does so as well. For example, Paul uses a similar
construct: “For as many as [hosos] are led by the Spirit of God, these are [eimi] sons of God” (Rom 8:14; NKJ).
Although the former (hosos) circumscribes the latter in determining who is a son of God, we may entertain the
possibility that both truths are not sequentially true but simultaneously true since they are true both at the same time.
In other words, Hendriksen’s argument that the events in Jn 1:12 happen simultaneously rather than sequentially
might potentially have a parallel in Rom 8:14 where we have hosos…eimi. But even if his argument against logical
sequence were valid, our argument above would still hold true that the former (hosos) determines the scope of the
latter (autos).

                                                 Verbal Sequence
But Hendriksen’s argument falters all the more grievously because John uses a verbal contrast to specify: “As many
as received Him, to them He gave the right to become [ginomai] children of God” (Jn 1:12). We do not have
hosos…eimi but hosos…ginomai. The contrast in the Johannine prolog between eimi (be) and ginomai (become) is
well known. We need only note the contrast between the parallel syntax and contrasting verbs in Jn 1:12 and Rom
8:14. Unlike Rom 8:14 (which syntactically allows the possibility of simultaneity), in Jn 1:12 we must affirm logical
sequence because they become something they were not before. Logically, the reception of the light must take place
before the recipient becomes a child of God. Hosos determines how many will become children of God, and ginomai
confirms the logical sequence: believe → become. The text does not say, “As many as received Him are (eimi)
children of God.” No. They become children of God as a result of receiving Christ.

Verse 12 is John’s summation of Jesus’ invitation: “While you have the light, believe in the light, in order that [hina]
you may become [ginomai] sons of light” (Jn 12:36). The order then is believe in order to become (believe →
become). What you become as a result of believing is something you were not before you believed: son of the Light
and a child of God. We therefore request that the Calvinist concede to the logical sequence of the text. Other texts,
such as Jn 5:40 confirm the obvious order: “Come to Me in order that you may have life.” The order is: come →
have. Clearly this refers to the inception of eternal life. Coming to Jesus in faith precedes coming into (initial and
eternal) possession of such life. Jesus is not telling believers in this verse how they can continue to experience the
abundant life they already have. (Snoeberger’s package argument complete fails.) The Lord is telling unbelievers how
to come into possession of life they do not have. According to John, the light of life is in God’s Son, and the only way
you can have such life is to have the Son (cp. Jn 1:4; 1Jn 5:11-12). So how can you possibly have eternal life before
you receive the Son? Obviously, you can’t. Rows D & E on the chart are ruled out as impossibilities and Row C is put
into serious jeopardy.

                                                        Parallel
When a non-Calvinist fails to note the logical sequence regarding hosos in Acts 13:48, Calvinists are quick to object.
This is a favorite Calvinistic proof text. “As many as [hosos] had been appointed to eternal life believed” (Acts
13:48). The pronoun hosos determines how many believed. The believed because they were appointed to eternal life.
Syntactical and verbal considerations compel us to acknowledge that they were appointed before they believed:
appointed → believed. We have conceded this order to the Calvinists. But we have met the Calvinists on their own
terms in evaluating Jn 1:12 under the same terms and concluded (due to similar syntactical and verbal considerations)
that they believed before they became: believed → became. They became children of God because they received
Christ. Calvinists should likewise be forthright in acknowledging that these believers were given the right to become
children of God because they received Christ. The order is: receive → became.




                             For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                   For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                         Options for Acts 13:48


                                                    Hosos
                                                  as many as




                  relative                                                           absolute


                (1)
                                   inclusive                                         exclusive

                      contextual                                       theological

                   (2)
                                                       tasso
                             (3)
                                                (4)              (5)


                                    reflexive                      passive

                                                         (7)
                                          (6)                           (8)


                                    arrranged                    appointed
                                     devoted                     disposed
                                        set                      prepared

                                     (9)        (10)                   (11)              (12)


                             self           gospel             environment               God


                      (13)         (14)                   (15)                    (16)                      (17)

                             transition                conviction             classification          providential




         Conditional                                                                                               Unconditional




As to the Calvinistic interpretation of Acts 13:48, there is little need to deal with the interpretation of this text here.
We have devoted an entire appendix to this verse in the Outer Darkness and will be content here to offer this chart as
summation of the various hermeneutical options discussed therein. There are seventeen ways that one might interpret
                               For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                     For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                      Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                         Misthologist@misthology.org
this verse and still come to a non-Calvinistic conclusion. In contrast, there is only one branch by which one might
derive the Calvinistic conclusion of unconditional election. To be sure, hermeneutical options need to be weighed, not
merely counted. But numerous of these alternatives were found to be very viable. We did point out the weaknesses in
that discussion of a couple of the non-Calvinistic interpretations. But the problem with discounting even those non-
Calvinistic arguments is that other considerations come into play from other strands of support that make even the
weaker non-Calvinistic arguments plausible in a web of support. One would typically have to break more than a
single strand in order to reject an single non-Calvinistic interpretation in the above chart. The opposite is true of the
line of arguments leading to the Calvinistic position. It is held by a single blue strand which if broken anywhere along
the way causes the Calvinistic interpretation to fall from consideration.

                                      We explain our particular translation of Jn 1:12 in the Outer Darkness and will
       received/believed
                                      not need to repeat that discussion here. However, the parallelism between
                                      receive and believe are fully self-evident within the verse so as to allow us to
                                      gloss over our translation for the present purpose. Faith is passive. Receiving a
gift is also passive. However, you have a choice as to whether or not you receive a gift. The fact that John uses the
verb received therefore not only signifies our passivity but our passive receptivity. Just as we chose to passively
receive a gift, so we are generally expected to be the ones in control of what we believe. This verb receive matches
well with the whosoever will implied by the pronoun hosos. We determine whether or not we will be given the right
to become children of God by our response to the offer of God’s gift. To illustrate, we note the following summation
of the Johannine parallelism:

          •      As many as received (lambano) Him were given the right to become children of God (Jn 1:12).
          •      And whosoever will let him take (lambano) the water of life freely (Rev 22:17)

Whether it be the gift of light or of life, the invitation is to ______________ (lambano) the gift. We may fill in this
blank with either receive or take. It makes no difference. When one takes a gift which is being offered to him, it is
obvious that he is passively receiving that gift. Likewise, when one receives a gift which is being offered to him, it is
obvious that he is doing so of his own free will in choosing to take it. The hosos indicates self-determinism and
lambano alludes to free will. In summary, whosoever will may come. The problem is that most choose not to of their
own accord.

                                       In a drastic attempt to avoid the obvious indications of free will, Morris
           gave the right              attempts to reverse the order of the verse. He claims gave means: “He gave the
                                       gift that they should receive the Word and become children of God” (John,
                                       98). So much for fidelity to scripture. The biblical text says the reverse. Not
only is Morris’ perversion of the order nonbiblical, it is nonsensical. John is not saying that God subsequently gave
the gift of faith those who had already believed. John is not saying that God does the giving before we do the
receiving!

                                                Inverted Order Within Jn 1:12




                             For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                   For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
But not all Calvinists are so perverse in their treatment of the verse. Hendriksen frankly admits: “We do not believe
that the solution of this problem lines in interpreting the sentence as if it should read: ‘But as many as received him,
to them he had previously given the right to become God’s children” (John, 81). To his credit, Hendriksen rejects the
attempt of his fellow Calvinists to stand the verse on its head. And certainly, in the same moment in which a gift is
received, it is given.

                                                    No Order Within Jn 1:12




But we have already demonstrated the weaknesses of Hendriksen’s attempt to lay the verse on its side and claim that
there is no order. There is an clear order pictured in our flow chart from top to bottom. If the verse be allowed to
stand on its feet, the clear order is that those who received/believed were given the right (exousia) to become children
of God. Contextual, syntactical, and verbal considerations demand that we acknowledge the logical order.

                                                Logical Order Within Jn 1:12




If we were to ask, “To whom is the right to become a child of God given?” the clear answer from the text would be,
“To those who receive Him.” The natural order is: receive → become. One does not need a course in Greek syntax to
see the natural order in what John is saying. If we were to say, “Those who bought the plane ticket were given the
right to get on the plane,” it is obvious that buying the picket precedes the right to get on the plane. Buying the ticket
is the condition for getting on the plane. In order to have the right to get on the plane, one must first purchase the
ticket.
                                                           Right
But why did John interject the word right (exousia)? Why not simply say that those who received/believed became
children of God? Because John wishes to interject another link in the chain of events. Godet’s (John, 265) argument
is very insightful. John is using exousia to truths associated with our new position in Christ such as: reconciliation,
justification, and adoption. He cites Gal 4:6 in support of placing adoption before regeneration: “Because you are
sons [huios], God has sent forth the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying, ‘Abba! Father!’” In Godet’s opinion,
God sending forth His Spirit into our heart is equivalent to John’s saying that we become children (teknon) of God by
                             For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                   For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
regeneration in which God imparts His life to us through the Spirit. The Johannine ordo salutis as Godet perceives it
is: (1) you receive Christ by believing in Him; (2) you are given a new position consisting of justification and
adoption; (3) you become a child of God by regeneration. In short, his ordo salutis is as pictured in Row A. Those
who become children of God do so because they have been given the right to do so.

We would find this argument rather conclusive as it is if it were not for the fact that Paul also said in Romans: “You
have received a spirit of adoption [huiothesia] as sons by which we cry out, ‘Abba! Father!’” (Rom 8:15). To be sure,
in the next sentence Paul adds, “The Spirit Himself testifies with our spirit that we are children [teknon] of God”
(Rom 8:16). And his doing so may be taken as support our position that we become adopted sons before we become
regenerate children. Nevertheless, it is not clear if Paul is simply enunciating the truth of Rom 8:15 in Gal 4:6 or if he
is encapsulating the twin truths of both Rom 8:15 and 8:16 in Gal 4:6.

If the latter, then our point is proven and Godet is correct: justification precedes regeneration (Row A). If the former,
then support for our putting justification before regeneration in Jn 1:12 to this point in our discussion is limited to the
fact that John placed our right to become children before the fact of our becoming children.1 Our estimation is that
such right would be a positional/legal change in status since it precedes the ontological event of regeneration which is
an impartation/community of nature. Even Morris perceived this facet correctly. In Pauline terms, we would be
inclined to think that they have the right because they have the righteousness of Christ imputed to them.
Consequently, they have the life of Christ imparted to them. Just as misthologically washed robes give us a right to
the tree of life (Rev 22:12), so soteriological righteousness is necessary to have a right to become a child of God.

                                          We have already seen that what determines whether or not one will become a
        to become                         child of God is whether or not one receives Christ. Calvinistic attempts to
children of God/born of God               invert the order by standing it on its head or to deny the order by laying it on
                                          its side have been found futile. Snoeberger tires a different approach. He tries
to give the verse a different conclusion, a different pair of shoes so to speak. He basically concedes the logical
sequence within v. 12 and then tires to limit teknon to mean adopted son. Second, having staked his entire argument
on this identification, he limits the logical sequence between vv.12 and 13 to one of three remaining options.

                                                   Three Adoption Options
The first option is that v. 13 refers back to the adopted children of v. 12. But (in his opinion) this would make
adoption and regeneration synonymous and reject the logical priority of regeneration. We will not belabor this point
since we disagree with his premise which takes teknon as referring to adoption in v. 12. However, we must point out
that he admitted that his first option was grammatically possible and would result in faith preceding regeneration (and
therefore a Row-A or Row-B understanding). This would be detrimental to the Row-C ordo salutis he is trying to
prove. He therefore concedes that his rejection of option one is on a theological basis. The basis he provides is the
bifurcation of adoption and redemption in the previous part of his discussion where he had acknowledged that
everyone places adoption after faith. It was therefore incumbent upon him to make a division between regeneration
and adoption and place faith between them. But if regeneration and adoption both come after faith (as Row-A and
Row-B advocates believe and option one indicates), then Snoeberger is going to need something stronger than an
appeal to bifurcation to show that regeneration precedes faith. In short, it appears that Snoeberger assumes the point
to be proven in order to prove the point he is trying to make—circular reasoning in other words. In any event, as it
currently stands, his first option discredits his own Row-C ordo and supports Row-A and Row-B instead.

The second option that Snoeberger provides is that v. 13 refers back to the adopted children of v. 12, but the verb
tense puts their birth before their adoption. He acknowledges that this position is grammatically and theologically
plausible. If so, the ordo it gives is: faith → regeneration → adoption. This is a Row-B understanding and refutes
Snoeberger’s Row-C placement of regeneration before faith. So how does he dispense with this ordo? By merely
remarking, “The purpose of the passage does not seem to be the construction of an ordo” (Ordo, 80). What kind of
response is this! On the basis of the contextual flow of the passage, the syntactical implementation of hosos, and the
verbal choice of ginomai, we find his remark ludicrous. Option two leads to (a non-Calvinistic version of) Row B.

The third and final option that Snoeberger provides is the one he prefers: (1) v. 13 refers back to v. 12 in its entirety—
with no logical relationship between the verses as to priority. If so the transition from v. 12 to v. 13 does not support
                             For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                   For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
any of the Rows. That is one possibility. There are two others. (2) If v. 13 refers back to v. 12 in its entirety and
continues the sequence, then it simply affirms that they experienced adoption in v. 12 and then regeneration in v. 13
(= Row A). Or (3) if v. 13 refers back to v. 12 and gives the antecedent (pluperfect) sequence, then it supports a Row-
C understanding. But Snoeberger evidently felt that trying to derive his argument from this latter approach would
have appeared to be grasping at straws since it would place v. 13 before v. 12 in logical sequence. Unfortunately for
him, this is the only one of his three options that gives plausibility to Row C. But acknowledging a logical priority in
option three would certainly put Row A, not Row C, in a favorable position. So once again, his own options lead him
away from a Row-C conclusion.

                                                Condition Versus Cause
So how does Snoeberger manage to pull off a Row-C sequence of regeneration before faith when his own options
lead away from that conclusion and the best alternative he can put forth for his own position is that there is no logical
sequence? He appeals to theology. Since his theology demands that regeneration precede faith, he concludes that it
must precede faith. In doing so, he reads his theology into the text rather than from it. Secondly, he appeals to the
nature of the verb born in v. 13. According to Calvinists, since we do not give physical birth to ourselves or have any
choice in the matter in the natural arena, the same must be true in the spiritual realm as well. We reject their
assessment on the basis of the whosoever implications of hosos and the nature of the verb received in v. 12. Of
course, we do not give birth to ourselves. No one is saying otherwise. Verse 13 only says that our birth is not of
ourselves; it does not say that our reception of Christ is not of ourselves. We do not spiritually inseminate ourselves.
But we do provide the passive receptivity to that activity. This passage is not describing the divine rape of the
unwilling or the divine necrophilia of the unreceptive.

In order to become airborne in a plane, a passenger must first get on the plane. His getting on the plane does not cause
the plane to fly, but it is a condition for his being borne through the air by the plane. In the same manner, our
receiving Christ is the condition for our being born of God, but it does not cause us to be born. Believing is the
condition, not cause, of regeneration. John illustrates this nicely. It is not his fault that Calvinists cannot tell the
difference between a condition and cause or try to place the cause before the condition. John has presented a very
orderly account in which he placed the condition for the cause before the cause. Verse 13 is his way of reiterating that
difference between condition and cause. God is the cause of our new birth. Our responsibility is to meet the condition
for new birth, not to cause our new birth. Consequently, our response determines whether or not God will cause our
rebirth.

                                                   The Leopard in Jer 13:23




Calvinists will insist that we can no more change our nature (i.e., regenerate ourselves) than a leopard change its
spots. For an animation of the above illustration, see leopard. As noted there, our question is not, “Can a leopard
change its spots?” but “Can a leopard drink water?” A leopard cannot change it spots. But could a leopard drink water
from a certain place that could? According to scripture, there was a leper who washed himself in the Jordan, and it
changed his skin (2Kings 5:1). This leper did not have the ability to change his skin, but he did have the ability to
wash himself in the Jordan. And doing so did so. It was his decision as to whether or not he would wash, but it had to
                             For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                   For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
be the Jordan, not some other river. We do not attribute the removal of the leprosy to the ability leper do we? Of
course not. Likewise, if God gave a leopard the option of drinking from a certain location so that it could change its
spots, we would not attribute the removal of its spots to the ability of the leopard. So why do Calvinists insist that we
are attributing the change in a lost person’s nature to the ability of the lost person? Such a notion is ludicrous as easy
shown by such analogies. God has given the sinner the option of drinking living water so that his nature may be
permanently changed from one of death to life. A sinner cannot change his nature, but he is able to drinking living
water which can do so. Calvinists confuse opportunity with ability.

The Calvinist will retort that dead man cannot drink. We will respond in like manner that dead man do not thirst. Yet
the Bible is clear that those in need of spiritual life can indeed thirst. They can come and drink living water in order to
quench that thirst (Jn 4:10, 13-14; 7:37; Rev 21:6; 22:17).2 The order is: thirst → drink → live. Likewise, the
spiritually dead must believing hear the gospel in order to “come to life spiritually” (Jn 5:25; WNT). The order is:
dead → hear → live. Dead men hear. The spiritually dead are the ones who need to hear in order to come into
possession of spiritual life. Whereas Row C might imagine that spiritual thirst is an indication of spiritual life, so that
those who thirst are already regenerate, we take the thirst described in these passages to be an indication of spiritual
need. A dead man is someone in need of spiritual life. A thirsty man is someone who needs a drink. A spiritually
thirsty man in someone in need of a drink of spiritual water. A spiritual dead man who thirsts for living water is a
someone who needs to drink living water in order to have spiritual life. He needs a drink in order to have life, not
because he already has it. Such thirst is an indication of prevenient grace.

                                                      Regeneration Options

Having examined the options presented by Snoeberger and found them leading away from the very conclusion to
which he wishes to drive us, it is time to reexamine his premise—that teknon is referring to adoption. According to
EBC, tekna (the plural form found in v. 12) is parallel to born ones. According to Constable, “The New Testament
speaks of the believer as a child of God and as a son of God. Technically it describes us as children by birth, the new
birth, and as sons by adoption. John consistently referred to believers only as children of God in his Gospel. He did
not call us the sons of God” (John, 20). If it be asked, “What about Jn 12:36?” Constable’s response would be that it
is using a Semitic idiom to describe ethical sonship in terms of behavior (p. 193) rather than Pauline adoption.
Hendriksen would concur. A Matthean parallel from the lips of Jesus illustrates this perspective: You do good works
in order to become sons (huios) of God in your conduct (Mt 5:45). You do not do good works in order to become
born again as a child of God or soteriologically adopted as a son of God. According to such commentators,
Snoeberger is in error treating tekna as adopted ones.

Morris (a Calvinist) explains at that the change in status (i.e., right) preceded the community of nature expressed by
tekna (children) so that John is not referring to adoption which would have been the case for huioi (sons). Lenski
agrees that John always uses children of God rather than sons of God for believers because “he always views it as the
product of regeneration” (pp. 61-61). Snoeberger claims that John does not use huios of believers merely because
John prefers to reserve the label huios to denote Jesus as the Son of God. Morris notes this preference but points out
that John does use huioi (the pl.) of men in Jn 12:36. Accordingly, Snoeberger’s claim sounds rather hallow. If John
had wished to describe us as adopted ones in 1:12, he could have easily have done so with huioi. Hendriksen concurs
that while “Paul uses both terms in describing believers as children of God,” in the Johannine gospel and epistles
“one becomes a ui`o,j [son] by adoption, but a te,knon [child] by regeneration.” “The noun [tekna] which John uses for
this purpose [in v. 12] comes from ti,ktw, to beget. To him salvation is the impartation of life…being begotten of
God” (p. 81).

In a nutshell, verses 12 and 13 affirm that those who believed in Christ were given the right to become begotten ones
(tekna) of God because they were begotten (gennao) by the will of God. John uses gennao to refer to the role of the
male parent in producing the begotten ones. This isn’t rocket science. It is more like Sex Ed 101. They were the
begotten ones of God (in v. 12) because they were begotten by God (v. 13)—not by some other source including
themselves. The sequential structure is simple:



                             For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                   For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
                     V. 12      Received/believed          →      given right       →          begotten of God
                     V. 13                                                                    begotten of…God
                      ∴                 faith              →     justification      →      regeneration/eternal life

The connection is not complicated. They begotten of God because they were begotten by God. The sequence
confirms Row A. An expanded rendition of our translation would be: “But as many as received Him, to them (to
those who believed in His name) He gave the change in status necessary to become begotten of God, who were
begotten not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God” (Jn 1:12-13; TM). Although
John attributes their receptivity to themselves with hosos, he reiterates that their regeneration itself is attributable only
to God. They are begotten of God, not of themselves. Verse 13 simply picks up on the conclusion of v. 12 and
reiterates that they were begotten of God. But just because their birth is attributable to God does not give us just
cause to concluded that the reception is sovereignly determined.

                                             Hermeneutical Probability
As mentioned above, when interpreting a passage of scripture, it is necessary not only to count the various options but
weigh them as well. In the charts which follow, although I might have assigned a greater weight to the interpretations
which I deem merit it, I simply assigned sequential values instead.

                                                      Sequence Within Jn 1:12

                                    hosos                                                     ginomai


                                             (2)       (3)
                                                                                        (3)              (2)
                          (1)
                                             (1)


              equivication                                   succession                                        determination


                    (2)                                            (5)                                               (5)



               Rows A-E                                       Rows A-C                                             Rows A-C


Row-C and Row-E advocates would need to deny the logical sequence within v. 12. Strangely perhaps, Hendriksen
resorted to this maneuver as well. The reason is obvious however. Since he acknowledged that tekna refers to
regeneration, he had to deny any order in the verse. Otherwise, he would have had to abandon Row C and adopted
Row B. Those taking this approach will have to maintain that neither hosos nor ginomai provide determination (i.e.,
syntactical circumscription) or succession (i.e., logical sequence). As the least likely option, these branches are
assigned the lowest hermeneutical probability (i.e., a value of only 1). It is much more reasonable to perceive a
succession in hosos and certainly a syntactical determination. Consequently, the values of 2 and 3 respectively were
assigned to these more promising candidates. Ginomai, on the other hand, is a stronger indicator of logical sequence
than mere syntactical determination and was assigned the corresponding latter two values in inverse proportion to
hosos. The combined values were then charted for each option under each main branch. As one may see, Rows A-C
break even in terms of hermeneutical probability for the ordo within v. 12 for the factors charted above. If one were
to combine the values of all branches, Rows A-C have a combined value of 12 (2 + 5 + 5), but Rows D-E only score
2.

This 12 to 2 hermeneutical preference of Rows A-C over Rows D-E gives us an objective basis for dispensing with
this latter two options as we proceed to the next chart which will demonstrate the hermeneutical probability of each of


                                For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                      For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                       Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                          Misthologist@misthology.org
Rows A-C. In other words, our first chart helped limit our range. Our next chart will help specify our finds in favor of
one particular row.
                                         Sequence Between Jn 1:12 & 1:13


                                                                           Tekna


                                                       (3)                                    (5)

                                   sons                                                                           Children
                                adopted ones                                                                    begotten ones




         Option 1                   Option 2                        Option 3                              exousia

                                        (3)                                                                     (5)         (4)
         (3)      (3)                                             (2)         (1)


    Row A          Row B             Row B                Row A                  Row C                     Row A          Row B




                 (5)                    (6)
                                                                     (1)


               Row A                 Row B                        Row C



In the above flow chart, we have surmised the primary options for the sequence principally between v. 12 and v. 13.
Although exousia actually deals with the sequence within v. 12 rather than between vv.12-13, it has been dealt with
in this chart rather than the above chart for sake of simplicity and to follow the flow of our discussion. Rows D and E
are not charted because they were ruled out as inconsequential by the sequential probability within v. 12. The
inclusion of exousia in that chart would have only provided redundancy to what was already made abundantly clear
by that chart—Rows D & E are not worthy of further consideration.

As before, the lowest value is 1. Despite appearances, the main branches from tekna do not actually skip from 3 to 5.
Rather, the value 5 had to be assigned to the main trunk because a sub-branch had to be assigned a 4 (and a sub-
branch cannot be given a value higher than its trunk). This sub-branch had to be given a 4 because it has a (much)
stronger probability than the value 3 assigned to main opposing trunk (that of adoption). Yet its value is rendered less
than that of its corresponding begotten counterpart by exousia. The terminus of each branch shows the computational
totals for each main trunk. If we were to combine the totals, we would come to a tie with Row A and B both having a
value of 10 (5 + 5 for A and 6 + 4 for B). Row C retains its lonely value of 1. As seen in the discussion, it is apparent
that our discussion does not hold A and B to be equally probable. While the discrepancy might be explained by
remembering that hermeneutics is as much an art as it is a science, there is another explanation readily available from
the chart itself. The value 10 does have value in that it shows the overall probability. However, if one wants to see the
particular value assigned by the present discussion, it would not be gleaned by simply adding all probabilities but by
noting that we dispensed with the adoption trunk in favor of the begotten trunk. Therefore, the present study finds
Row A (much) more persuasive than Row B, as attested by the 5 to 4 value reflected in the chart for that trunk.

                             For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                   For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                       Summary
Our analysis of Jn 1:12 has lead us to the conclusion that the nominal term begotten in v. 12, which is nestled in a
sequential array of events within that verse and context, is indeed referring to the same event being described in v. 13
with verbal form begotten. Since it is conceded by all that v. 13 refers to regeneration and since our study places this
event after faith, regeneration has been found to follow faith, leaving us with only Rows A and B as true contenders
to the hermeneutical throne. Exousia then crowned Row A with the right to the throne. The populace, lead by hosos
and lambano, applauded in improvement, shouting, “Whosoever will may come.”
1
  We believe Godet is correct in equating the ordo in Jn 1:12 with Gal 4:6 for several reasons. For one thing, we have
derived our conclusion for Johannine ordo regarding Jn 1:12 without reliance upon the Pauline ordo in Gal 4:6.
Nevertheless, having derived our conclusion for the Johannine ordo independently of the Pauline perspective, we are
now in a position to compare this Johannine ordo with Godet’s perception regarding the Pauline ordo in Gal 4:6.
Naturally, we expect John and Paul to be in agreement on the order. When this comparison is made, a perfect match
is found in support of Row A.
      Secondly, the allusion to Rom 8:15 may be an illusion. The spirit (small “s”) of adoption in Rom 8:15 need not
be equated with the Spirit (capital “S”) found in Gal 4:6. Nor should this distinction be glossed over. In Rom 8:15 the
antithetical parallelism is between the spirit of slavery and the spirit of adoption/sonship. It is not at all apparent that
the allusion is to the Holy Spirit Himself in 8:15. The translations are divided on the issue. If the Holy Spirit is not the
allusion, then the parallel to Gal 4:6 is only an illusion and does not detract from Godet’s Row-A conclusion. On the
other hand, if the Holy Spirit is the allusion, then Paul could be understood as affirming that the Spirit who we
received as a result of our adoption enables us to cry out to God as Father (adoption → Spirit), and Godet’s
conclusion is affirmed. On the other hand, if Calvinists insist that Spirit of adoption must mean the Spirit who
produces adoption (i.e., Spirit → adoption), then what will they do with justification of life in Rom 5:18. If Spirit of
adoption means Spirit → adoption, then would we not be inclined to conclude that justification of life means
justification → life? But that would concede the order in Row A and thus affirm Godet’s conclusion. Moreover, the
context of Rom 5:18 strongly suggests that justification of life does in fact mean the justification that results in life
(i.e., justification → life) since Paul has just mentioned that many transgressions resulting (eis) in justification (Rom
5:16) and the possibility of this gift of righteousness resulting in a future experience of life (Rom 5:17), specifically
so that righteousness might result (eis) in eternal life (Rom 5:21). The context is saturated with references to life as
the intended result of justification. Consequently, the genitive in justification of life (Rom 5:18) should be regarded as
a genitive of purpose. For example, Wallace puts both resurrection of life and resurrection of judgment (Jn 5:29) into
this category, noting that “the genitives seem to express both purpose and result” (GGBB, 101; emphasis his).
Obviously, the logical order is resurrection → judgment, not judgment → resurrection. To read justification of life as
life → justification would be to reverse the flow of the context and make life the source of justification. But Wallace
comments make a genitive of source even more unlikely: “Since this usage is not common, it is not advisable to seek
it as the most likely one for a particular genitive that may fit under another label” (GGBB, 109). A genitive of
purpose would therefore be much more likely than a genitive of source. God gives us justification for the purpose of
legally qualifying us for eternal life. Eternal life is the result of justification. Despite the havoc that putting
justification before life would cause for the Calvinist, Hendriksen translates Rom 5:18 as righteousness resulted for
all men in justification issuing in life and acknowledges that “justification…opens the gate to life” (Romans, 182-
183).
      Thirdly and most importantly, the context in Galatians leads to a Row-A understanding. Paul reminded the
Galatians that they received the Spirit by hearing with faith (Gal 3:2-5, cp. 3:14,22; Eph 1:13). In fact, their
reception of the Spirit by faith is identified as how they began by the Spirit (v. 3). Obviously, regeneration is in view.
Consequently, the Pauline ordo is: hearing → faith → regeneration. This leaves us with either a Row-A or Row-B
ordo. Paul proceeds to remind them that in addition to being regenerate by faith, they were also justified by faith
(3:24) and became sons through faith (3:26). So from Paul’s affirmations we know that regeneration, justification,
and sonship follow faith, but we do not know in what order these three benefits follow faith from what he has said
thus far in this ch 3. As we concluded Gal 3, we are still left with either a Row-A or Row-B ordo. However, a few
verses later Paul clarifies this latter part of his ordo: “Because you are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of His Son
into our hearts” (Gal 4:6). Here, Paul gives us a clear order of two of the benefits he had just described that come after
faith. The because shows that the reason God sent forth His Spirit into their hearts in the act of regeneration was
because they were sons. Sonship is the basis for God having sent forth His Spirits into their hearts in the act of
regeneration described in ch. 3. Sonship/adoption is the grounds for regeneration: adoption → regeneration. Their
                             For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                   For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                    Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
legal change in status preceded the ontological change in their heart. Consequently, we may deduce that justification
(adoption’s legal twin) also occurred before regeneration. The Pauline ordo therefore, as derived from the context, is
unmistakable: hearing → faith → adoption & justification → regeneration. The Pauline ordo is the same as the
Johannine ordo, as shown by a simple contextual examination of their respective passages in Gal 4:6 and Jn 1:12. To
restate, there are three affirmations of ordo in Gal 3:
• Faith → regeneration (i.e., received/begun by the Spirit by faith; Gal 3:2-5, cp. 3:14,22)
• Faith → justified (i.e., justification by faith; Gal 3:24).
• Faith → adoption (i.e., sons through faith; Gal 3:26).
So we know that regeneration, justification, and adoption follow faith, but we do not know in what order until Paul adds:
• Adoption → regeneration (Gal 4:6).
With this clarification, we now know that regeneration follows adoption. A simple syllogism allows us to conclude:
(1) Since faith comes before adoption and regeneration and since (2) adoption comes before regeneration, (3) the order in
which they occur is: faith → adoption → regeneration. We derive this conclusion by just taking Paul’s statements at face
value. Since justification and adoption are facets of the same legal transformation, we may infer that they happen at the
same time. Therefore, the full order is faith → adoption/justification → regeneration.
2
  In Jn 4:10, we have a clear conditional sequence as denoted by Jesus’ if: ask ⇒ given. The syntax leaves no doubt as to
the conditional nature of this sentence. Those who know what the gift is are told what them must do in order to have the
gift: Ask for living water in order to be given water. In other words, they must believe in Jesus for living water in order to
be given living water by Jesus: faith ⇒ regeneration. Likewise, in 4:14 the order is: drink then have living water. We take
this logical sequence of drink → have to denote a conditional sequence as well: drink ⇒ have. Obviously, we do not have
this water before we drink it, and we must drink it in order to have it. We must drink it for it to become a well of water
within us. The conditional nature of the promise is clear. If you drink it, then you will have it: if A then B (i.e., A ⇒ B).
Jesus explicitly presents us with this same conditional sequence later: “If anyone eats of this bread, then he will live
forever” (Jn 6:51; TM). Both Jn 4:10 and 6:51 use a syntactically conditional structure to make the conditional sequence
inescapable. If we drink/eat (=believe), then we will have eternal life as a result. Faith is the condition for regeneration:
faith ⇒ regeneration. As a result, faith must logically precede regeneration: faith → regeneration. This conditional
sequence of faith ⇒ regeneration is the same logical sequence we encounter in Jn 1:12-13. If you receive/believe Christ,
then you will become children/born of God: faith → regeneration. The conditional sequence of faith ⇒ regeneration
demands the logical sequence of faith → regeneration. John’s order in Jn 1:12 is in agreement with Jesus’ condition in Jn
4:10 and 6:51. Faith is the condition for regeneration and consequently precedes regeneration both logically and
conditionally. The conditional syntax confirms the logical sequence.




                              For further discussion, see the GES Chat at http://www.faithalone.org/chat.html.
                                    For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                     Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2007
                                                        Misthologist@misthology.org
