                                            Postflood Giants
                                                        8/6/2016
Biblical Supplementation
 2 Peter 2:4-9 4 For if God did not spare angels when they sinned, but cast them into Tartarus and committed them
    to pits of darkness, reserved for judgment; 5 and did not spare the ancient world, but preserved Noah, a preacher of
    righteousness, with seven others, when He brought a flood upon the world of the ungodly; 6 and if He condemned
    the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to destruction by reducing them to ashes, having made them an example to those
    who would live ungodly thereafter; 7 and if He rescued righteous Lot, oppressed by the sensual conduct of
    unprincipled men 8 (for by what he saw and heard that righteous man, while living among them, felt his righteous
    soul tormented day after day with their lawless deeds), 9 then the Lord knows how to rescue the godly from
    temptation, and to keep the unrighteous under punishment for the day of judgment,
 Jude 1:6-8 6 And angels who did not keep their own domain, but abandoned their proper abode, He has kept in
    eternal bonds under darkness for the judgment of the great day. 7 just as Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities around
    them, since they [i.e., these cities] in the same way as these [fallen angels] indulged in gross immorality and went
    after strange flesh, are exhibited as an example, in undergoing the punishment of eternal fire. 8 Yet in the same
    manner these men, also by dreaming, defile the flesh, and reject authority, and revile angelic majesties.

Extrabiblical Supplementation:
         As to using extrabiblical texts, Michael Heiser insists: “The inspired New Testament writers were perfectly
comfortable referencing content found in 1 Enoch and other Jewish books to articulate their theology.” “For the person
who considers the Old and New Testament to be equally inspired, interpreting Genesis 6:1-4 ‘in context’ means analyzing
it in light of its Mesopotamian background as well as 2 Peter and Jude, whose content utilizes supernatural interpretations
from Jewish theology of their own day” (Unseen Realm, 98-100). Mesopotamia was the cradle of civilization. The Tower
of Babel was located there, and Abram was called from there (Gen 24:10)

       In implementing extrabiblical texts, Steve Quayle (Angel Wars, 107) says that both Eccl 16:8-9 and Jub 20:4-5
“relate that in the time of Abraham giants lived in Sodom and Gomorrah.”

   Jubilees 20:1-5: 1 And in the forty-second jubilee, in the first year of the seventh week, Abraham called Ishmael,
    and his twelve sons, and Isaac and his two sons, and the six sons of Keturah, and their sons. 2 And he commanded
    them that they should observe the way of the Lord...4 And if any woman or maid commit fornication amongst you,
    burn her with fire and let them not commit fornication with her after their eyes and their heart; and let them not take
    to themselves wives from the daughters of Canaan; for the seed of Canaan will be rooted out of the land. 5 And he
    told them of the judgment of the giants, and the judgment of the Sodomites, how they had been judged on account
    of their wickedness, and had died on account of their fornication, and uncleanness, and mutual corruption through
    fornication.
   Ecclesiasticus 16:8-9: The ancient giants did not obtain pardon for their sins, who were destroyed trusting to their
    own strength: And he spared not the place where Lot sojourned, but abhorred them for the pride of their word.

       Dante Fortson (As The Days of Noah Were, 186) also notes that the postflood Nephilim were in the Promised Land
during the days of Noah:

              There were multiple tribes of post flood Nephilim, but they all fall under the era of the Rephaim, the
       second wave of the Nephilim on earth. Those that believe in multiple incursions by the fallen angels usually
       put the second wave in Canaan just before the Hebrews reached the Promised Land. However, the Bible
       actually places their second incursion very soon after the flood....We can clearly see that several tribes of
       Nephilim were involved in the war that took place in Abraham’s day. The tribes included the Rephaim,
       Zuzims, Emims, and Amalekites....The Amalekites very existence angered God to the point that He ordered
       Saul to wipe them out. Saul does not obey and keeps king Agag alive against God’s will. Because of his
       disobedience, Saul is later replaced by David as king of Israel.




                                             Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2016
                                               Misthologist@misthology.org
Postflood Giants                                                                                                              Page 2
Rephaim
                                                  No Resurrection
       The Rephaim in Gen 14:5 are an early group of nonhuman postflood giants. They will not experience a resurrection
(Is 26:14). Heiser explains:

                In Isaiah 26:14 it appears that the metim and the rephaim are identified with each other. This isn’t
         certain, but it looks that way, since both “they’s” in v. 14 likely refer back to v. 13-the other lords that ruled
         over Israel. This may refer to kings of old (and perhaps of giant clan lineage) that ruled over Israel but
         which were killed off.
                I would argue, though, that in Isaiah 26:19 the dead are humans-specifically, human followers of
         Yahweh (“YOUR dead”-speaking of Yahweh). These believers will rise / be resurrected. In contrast the
         earth (the ʾerets in Hebrew) will ABORT the rephaim. The word ʾerets is the normal word for “earth” or
         “land,” but it is also a synonym for Sheol. The verb here is naphal. In the Hiphil stem in means to “drop”
         and is used elsewhere as a euphemism for miscarriage or abortion. This passage is in what is known to
         scholars as Isaiah’s “little apocalypse” (Isaiah 24-27). I take it as a reference to events associated with the
         Day of the Lord, when the evil spirits will be expelled or released from the Pit before their final defeat (cf.
         Revelation 9).1

      To check Heiser’s claim, I noted this 8th definition from HALOT: “to let drop”, meaning to give birth (cf. qal 5,
MHeb. hif.; JArm. af. to abort).” Strong’s Concordance would also define it as a miscarriage. So it can refer to un
untimely birth. Thus his assertion has some lexical plausibility.
                                                 Seeming Contradiction
         Some translations make it seem that Is 26:14 is contradicted by Is 26:19.

                 NAS
                     Isaiah 26:14 The dead will not live, the departed spirits will not rise; Therefore Thou hast
                  punished and destroyed them, And Thou hast wiped out all remembrance of them.

                 NAS
                      Isaiah 26:19 Your dead will live; Their corpses will rise. You who lie in the dust, awake and
                  shout for joy, For your dew is as the dew of the dawn, And the earth will give birth to the departed
                  spirits.
                                          English Translations of Is 26:19
       However, the apparent contraction might be because of a mistranslation of Is 26:19. I consulted a verity of English
translations of the verse:

          BBE
               Isaiah 26:19 Your dead will come back; their dead bodies will come to life again. Those in the dust,
           awaking from their sleep, will send out a song; for your dew is a dew of light, and the earth will give birth
           to the shades.

          CJB
               Isaiah 26:19 Your dead will live, my corpses will rise; awake and sing, you who dwell in the dust; for
           your dew is like the morning dew, and the earth will bring the ghosts to life.

          DRA
               Isaiah 26:19 Thy dead men shall live, my slain shall rise again: awake, and give praise, ye that dwell
           in the dust: for thy dew is the dew of the light: and the land of the giants thou shalt pull down into ruin.

          GWN
              Isaiah 26:19 Your dead will live. Their corpses will rise. Those who lie dead in the dust will wake up
           and shout for joy, because your dew is a refreshing dew, and the earth will revive the spirits of the
           dead.

          JPS
               Isaiah 26:19 Thy dead shall live, my dead bodies shall arise - awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust
           - for Thy dew is as the dew of light, and the earth shall bring to life the shades.



1
  Michael Heiser, “Discerning the Dead, Part 2.” Available at http://drmsh.com/discerning-the-dead-part-2. Accessed
8/6/2016. For extended discussion of Rephaim by Heiser, see http://drmsh.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/Rephaim-
LBD.pdf.
Postflood Giants                                                                                                 Page 3
          KJV
              Isaiah 26:19 Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing,
           ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.

          LXE
              Isaiah 26:19 The dead shall rise, and they that are in the tombs shall be raised, and they that are in
           the earth shall rejoice: for the dew from thee is healing to them: but the land of the ungodly shall perish.

          NAB
              Isaiah 26:19 But your dead shall live, their corpses shall rise; awake and sing, you who lie in the dust.
           For your dew is a dew of light, and the land of shades gives birth.

          NAS
               Isaiah 26:19 Your dead will live; Their corpses will rise. You who lie in the dust, awake and shout for
           joy, For your dew is as the dew of the dawn, And the earth will give birth to the departed spirits.

          NET
               Isaiah 26:19 Your dead will come back to life; your corpses will rise up. Wake up and shout joyfully,
           you who live in the ground! For you will grow like plants drenched with the morning dew, and the earth will
           bring forth its dead spirits.

          NIV
              Isaiah 26:19 But your dead will live; their bodies will rise. You who dwell in the dust, wake up and shout
           for joy. Your dew is like the dew of the morning; the earth will give birth to her dead.

          NLT
              Isaiah 26:19 But those who die in the LORD will live; their bodies will rise again! Those who sleep in
           the earth will rise up and sing for joy! For your life-giving light will fall like dew on your people in the
           place of the dead!

          NRS
               Isaiah 26:19 Your dead shall live, their corpses shall rise. O dwellers in the dust, awake and sing for
           joy! For your dew is a radiant dew, and the earth will give birth to those long dead.

          TNK
               Isaiah 26:19 Oh, let Your dead revive! Let corpses arise! Awake and shout for joy, You who dwell in
           the dust! -- For Your dew is like the dew on fresh growth; You make the land of the shades come to life.

          YLT
               Isaiah 26:19 'Thy dead live -- My dead body they rise. Awake and sing, ye dwellers in the dust, For the
           dew of herbs is thy dew, And the land of Rephaim thou causest to fall.


                                                     Rephaim YLT
         I then compared the references to Rephim in YLT:
         YLT
           Genesis 14:5 And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings who are with him, and they
smite the Rephaim in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzim in Ham, and the Emim in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
       YLT
           Genesis 15:20 and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Rephaim, [cp. Gen 15:18]
       YLT
           Deuteronomy 2:11 Rephaim they are reckoned, they also, as the Anakim; and the Moabites call them
Emim. [cp. 2:9-12]
        20
           'A land of Rephaim it is reckoned, even it; Rephaim dwelt in it formerly, and the Ammonites call them
Zamzummim;
       YLT
           Deuteronomy 3:11 for only Og king of Bashan had been left of the remnant of the Rephaim; lo, his
bedstead is a bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbath of the sons of Ammon? nine cubits its length, and four cubits its
breadth, by the cubit of a man.
        13
           and the rest of Gilead and all Bashan, the kingdom of Og, I have given to the half tribe of Manasseh; all
the region of Argob, to all that Bashan, called the land of Rephaim.
       YLT
           Joshua 12:4 And the border of Og king of Bashan (of the remnant of the Rephaim), who is dwelling in
Ashtaroth and in Edrei,
       YLT
           Joshua 13:12 all the kingdom of Og in Bashan, who reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei; he was left of the
remnant of the Rephaim, and Moses doth smite them, and dispossess them;
       YLT
           Joshua 15:8 and the border hath gone up the valley of the son of Hinnom, unto the side of the Jebusite
on the south (it is Jerusalem), and the border hath gone up unto the top of the hill-country which is on the front of
the valley of Hinnom westward, which is in the extremity of the valley of the Rephaim northward;
       YLT
           Joshua 17:15 And Joshua saith unto them, 'If thou art a numerous people, go up for thee to the forest,
then thou hast prepared for thee there, in the land of the Perizzite, and of the Rephaim, when mount Ephraim hath
been narrow for thee.'
       YLT
           Joshua 18:16 and the border hath come down unto the extremity of the hill which is on the front of the
Postflood Giants                                                                                                      Page 4
valley of the son of Hinnom, which is in the valley of the Rephaim northward, and hath gone down the valley of
Hinnom unto the side of Jebusi southward, and gone down to En-Rogel,
        YLT
            2 Samuel 5:18 and the Philistines have come, and are spread out in the valley of Rephaim.
         22
            ¶ And the Philistines add again to come up, and are spread out in the valley of Rephaim,
        YLT
            2 Samuel 23:13 ¶ And three of the thirty heads go down and come unto the harvest, unto David, unto the
cave of Adullam, and the company of the Philistines are encamping in the valley of Rephaim,
        YLT
            1 Chronicles 11:15 ¶ And three of the thirty heads go down on the rock unto David, unto the cave of
Adullam, and the host of the Philistines is encamping in the valley of Rephaim,
        YLT
            1 Chronicles 14:9 And the Philistines have come, and rush into the valley of Rephaim,
        YLT
             1 Chronicles 20:4 ¶ And it cometh to pass, after this, that there remaineth war in Gezer with the
Philistines, then hath Sibbechai the Hushathite smitten Sippai, of the children of the giant, and they are humbled.
        YLT
            Job 26:5 The Rephaim are formed, Beneath the waters, also their inhabitants.
        YLT
            Psalm 88:10 To the dead dost Thou do wonders? Do Rephaim rise? do they thank Thee? Selah.
        YLT
            Proverbs 2:18 For her house hath inclined unto death, And unto Rephaim her paths.
        YLT
            Proverbs 9:18 And he hath not known that Rephaim are there, In deep places of Sheol her invited ones!
        YLT
            Proverbs 21:16 A man who is wandering from the way of understanding, In an assembly of Rephaim
resteth.
        YLT
            Isaiah 14:9 Sheol beneath hath been troubled at thee, To meet thy coming in, It is waking up for thee
Rephaim, All chiefs ones of earth, It hath raised up from their thrones All kings of nations.
        YLT
            Isaiah 17:5 And it hath come to pass, As the gathering by the reaper of the standing corn, And his arm
the ears reapeth, And it hath come to pass, As the gathering of the ears in the valley of Rephaim,
        YLT
            Isaiah 26:14 Dead -- they live not, Rephaim, they rise not, Therefore Thou hast inspected and dost destroy
them, Yea, thou destroyest all their memory.
         Isaiah 26:19 'Thy dead live -- My dead body they rise. Awake and sing, ye dwellers in the dust, For the dew
of herbs is thy dew, And the land of Rephaim thou causest to fall.
                                               Summation of Rephaim
       I highlighted the more interesting references in yellow and place the more peculiar references in red font. A
conceptual play on words is discernable: Earth will give miscarriage to the earthborn. In Gr. mythology, the giants were
the earthborn of Mother Earth—Gaia. The Earth will cause the fall out of the fallen. My expanded translation would be:

      “Your dead will live; their corpses will rise. You who lie in the dust, awake and shout for joy, for your dew
      is as the dew of the dawn, but the Earth will give violent premature birth to her fallen dead earthborn
      Rephaim” (Is 26:19; TM). These giants will return: “Lift up a standard on the mountain of the plain, exalt
      the voice to them, beckon with the hand, open the portals, you rulers. 3 I give command, and I bring them:
      Giants are coming to fulfil my wrath, rejoicing at the same time and insulting” (Is 13:2-3; TM)
 Canaanites
       From the above analysis, we can see that a variety of postflood giants inhabited the land of Canaan shortly after
the flood. Some nephologists would attribute this to a second incursion that occurred very soon after the flood. But this
proposal begs several questions: Why they went specifically to the land of Canaan even before Abraham was sent there
by God? Why did Noah prophesy the slavery of the Canaanites rather than their eradication (Gen 9:25-27)?2 If their
presence was a result of a second incursion, and thus unredeemable DNA contamination, why were many of the
Canaanites submitted to subjugation, marital prohibition, or supplantation rather than extermination?

              Extermination (Dt 7:2-3; 1Sam 15:3)
              Subjugation (Gen 9:25-27; Josh 9:23; 16:10; 17:3; Judg 1:28-35; 1Kgs 9:20-21; 2Chron 8:7-9)3
              Marital Prohibition (Gen 24:3; 28:1; cp. Dt 7:2-3)
              Supplantation (Ex 23:28-30; 23:31; 33:2; 34:11,24; Lev 20:23; Num 33:52,55; Dt 9:3; 11:23; 18:12; Josh
               13:6; Josh 14:12; 15:63; 23:13; Judg 1:19-33, etc.)

      The postflood DNA contamination theory has problems explaining the latter three. Therefore, many would pose
a moral rather genetic rationale. For example, Copan would say that the extermination order was given because the

2
 For the boundaries of the Canaan’s descendants, the Canaanites, see Gen 10:15-20.
3
  For discussion of subjugation of Gibeonites as descendants of Cain, see Odhiambo (pp.129-130). But the gist of the
argument is easy to summarize. Ethnically, the Gibeonites were the Hivites who lived in Gibeon (Josh 9:3-7;11:19), as
such they were descendants of Canaan (Gen 10:15-17).
Postflood Giants                                                                                                Page 5
Canaanites were morally and spiritually corrupt—beyond redemption (p. 66). In Dt 13:15, God gave the type of order
for Israel because of idolatry (p. 165). All does not mean all, even in 1Sam 15:3 (p. 177). Rahab and her family was an
exception (p. 177). Some Canaanites were driven out (p. 181); some were assimilated (p. 187). (Copan, Is God a Moral
Monster, 66, 158-197).
