                   Promised Redeemer
                               Revised 5/31/2011
                                 Introduction
          Suppose someone had an OT and Jn 3:16 and believed in
Immanuel (cf. Is 9:6) as God’s Son for eternal life. Is this faith sufficient or
insufficient for receiving eternal life? Hodges statements might be taken to
indicate that this faith would be insufficient for salvation: “People are
saved by believing in Jesus….Not by believing in an unknown Messiah.
Believing in Jesus. Regardless of how people were saved in the OT, this is
how they are saved now.”1 In this same article, Hodges indicates that if a
person only had Jn 6:47 that would be insufficient because the name Jesus
(from Jn 6:43) would be missing.2 Faith in some Christ is insufficient.
Saving faith must embrace Jesus as the Christ—at least that is the case
now that Christ has come in the flesh in the person of Jesus.
          On the other hand, according to Hodges, the name Jesus (as such)
is not what saves but the person represented by that name. Saving faith is
in the historical person of Jesus regardless as to whether those with whom
He spoke and saw Him knew His name at the point of coming to saving
faith.3 In His encounter with the woman at the well, for example, Jesus
receives a response that would be fairly standard for someone in that day
and time: “I know that Messiah is coming (He who is called Christ); when
that One comes, He will declare all things to us” (Jn 4:25). Hodges’ point
is that she could have been saved even without knowing Jesus’ name since
she was talking to Jesus the person and could have trusted in Him as the
Christ for eternal life even without knowing His name.
                            Jewish Woman at Well
         For sake of a purely hypothetical illustration, suppose that Jesus
met another woman at a different well the next week, a Jewish woman,
who responded to Jesus by saying, “I believe that Messiah is coming (He
who is called Christ); when that One comes, He will declare all things to
us. I just don’t believe that you are Him.” After all, conceivably, quite a
few people who rejected Jesus would have had an attitude akin to this
sentiment. Like the Samaritan woman at the well, they believed that the
Messiah was coming; they just did not believe that Jesus was that Messiah.
         In all likelihood, a person who rejected Jesus as the Christ was not
a believer in the OT sense of the word since exegetical indicators would

1
  Zane Hodges, “The Spirit of Antichrist: Decoupling Jesus from the Christ,” JOTGES
20:39 (Autumn 2007), 42.
2
  Ibid., 41.
3
  Ibid., 43.

                          Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                            Misthologist@misthology.org
lead us to suspect that any OT believer who encountered a call to faith in
Jesus as the Christ during Jesus’ earthly ministry infallibly responded
positively. Thus, those Messianic expecters of Christ who were rejecters of
Jesus probably had a defective view of MR in the GMR (Grounds, Means,
Result) model.4 Consequently, as a result of rejecting Jesus as the Christ,
they subsequently had a defective view of G as well. This article will
explore why this is necessarily the case.
          To proceed with the illustration of the Jewish woman at the well,
suppose that she believed that her offering OT sacrifices were a means of
her receiving soteric pardon as a linear result. In such case, her faith in the
Promised Redeemer was defective because she was trusting in her
performance for probation rather than in her punctiliar appropriation for
salvation.5 This Jewish woman is not a believer because she is trusting in
her sacrifices for entrance into the Messianic kingdom. Suppose that Jesus
clarifies that sacrifices cannot soteriologically atone and shows her from
the OT that the Messiah would have to die an atoning death and that the
proper soteric response is simple faith. Further assume that she comes to
believe that Jesus is correct in His interpretation of OT concerning M and
R, but she does not believe that Jesus is the Messiah. Perhaps she just
believes Him to be a prophet. Would she be saved? No.
          Now that she has meet Jesus and has rejected Him as the Christ,
her resultantly defective view of G would disqualify her from receiving
eternal life. She is not trusting in Jesus for eternal life. Had someone other
than Jesus presented that clarification of MR and had she accepted this
clarification from this other person without having heard about Jesus, she
could have been saved with an Immanuel (OT level) understanding of the
Messiah. But once she heard the clarifier that Immanuel had come, she
would have to believe in the historical person Jesus.


4
  They had to believe that the Promised Redeemer would take care of their sin problem
simply on the condition of their faith in that redeemer. In terms of GMR, their faith had
to be grounded in that redeemer, they had to understand that they were saved by means
of their punctiliar faith in the redeemer, and they had to understand that the result of
their faith in this promised redeemer was unconditional security.
5
  OT believers may have not have realized that their sacrifices were typologically
pointing forward to the Messiah offering Himself as their sacrifice. These OT believers
simply may have viewed their sacrifices as an expression of faith in the Messiah who
would somehow take away their sins. What was necessary for their faith to be imputed
as soteric righteousness was that they not trust in their sacrifices as a means to secure
soteric pardon. The expressions or manifestations of their faith were not imputed to
them as righteous, nor were they the means of that imputation. Their sacrifices were not
imputed to them as righteousness nor were their sacrifices the means of their being
granted that righteousness. Rather, their faith in the Promised Redeemer resulted in the
righteousness of the Promised Redeemer being imputed to their account.

                            Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                              Misthologist@misthology.org
          Suppose this Jewish woman came to this persuasion that Jesus
was the Messiah twenty years later, after she initially met Jesus at the well,
and then at this later point in time she finally believed that He was the
Christ. Further, suppose that she believed that He died an atoning death but
(under Gnostic influence) thought that whether He rose from the dead was
immaterial. In her opinion, even if He was just raised from the dead
spiritually, she was still trusting in Him alone for eternal life. Then her
GMR is savingly sufficient. She would be saved even though she had a
defective view of the resurrection.6 In such a case, her defective
perspective would not prevent her from believing in the correct person.
Her faith would be grounded in Jesus as the historical Christ for eternal
life, although she wrongly discredits some historical information about
Jesus as the Christ.
                         Technical Abbreviations
         To expresses these options with greater technical precision, she
could be saved by trusting in HPI (historical person Immanuel) until she
was exposed to the HPJ (historical person Jesus). Then she would have to
believe in HPJ. Before that time, her belief in HPI was pointing her
unknowingly to HPJ. However, after being exposed to HPJ, if she rejected
HPJ, then her belief in HPI was pointing her unknowingly away from HPJ
and to HP2. In other words, once she heard of HPJ, she no longer could
believe savingly in HPI without believing in HPJ. Otherwise, she would
believe that HPI ≠ HPJ (which is non-saving G). In such a case, she would
believe in HP2 (which is non-saving faith).7

Saving G (any one of the following three):
    1. HPI (=HPJ)
        OT believers who had not been exposed to HPJ but who believed
        in Immanuel (or equivalent) as the Promised Redeemer
        experienced saving faith. Even though they were not aware of it,
        by trusting in HPI, they were implicitly and unknowingly trusting
        in HPJ.




6
  Her defective view of Jesus’ resurrection correspondingly would involve an erroneous
view of the means by which Jesus accomplished her redemption. But this defective
view of Jesus’ role would not nullify M because she would still have a proper view of
her role as simple faith. She still would qualify for a soterically correct M.
7
  Saving faith must have correct GMR, non-saving faith has an incorrect GMR. All
three components must be sufficiently accurate for saving faith to occur. For the
purpose of the present inquiry, however, G is the focus of attention.

                           Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                             Misthologist@misthology.org
    2. HPI = HPJ
       OT-NT believers who have been exposed to HPJ and explicitly
       believe Jesus to be HPI have experienced saving faith.

    3. HPJ
       NT believers who have been exposed only to HPJ and believe in
       Jesus for eternal life have experienced saving faith.

Non-saving G (any one of the following three):
   1. HPI ≠ HPJ
       People who heard the OT and NT message and rejected Jesus have
       not experienced saving faith. They reject HPJ before coming to
       saving faith in HPI. After rejecting HPJ, it is too late to be saved
       by HPI since they explicitly would be rejecting HPJ and implicitly
       believing in HP2. After rejecting HPJ, their faith in HPI would no
       longer be pointing them to HPJ.

    2. HP2
       People who hear the OT message but who do not hear the NT
       message and believe in a historical person other than Jesus as
       Messiah have not experienced saving faith. This is a corollary of
       the above statement since HP2 ≠ HPJ.

    3. NHP
       People who believe in some non-historical impersonal entity have
       not experienced saving faith. The premise that G would have to be
       belief in a historical person is based in part upon the Promised
       Redeemer motif that was introduced cryptically from the
       beginning in Gen 3:15. Belief in some non-personal (or non-
       physical) entity such as Logos, Sophia, or Light would not qualify
       for saving faith. The world through its wisdom may project
       Logos, Sophia or Light theories, but these theories do not suffice
       as a sufficient grounds for coming to saving faith in God (1Cor
       1:21). Faith comes from hearing the word of God about Christ
       (Rom 10:17). To trust in a Promised Redeemer who did not come
       in the flesh is to trust in Antichrist rather than Christ (1Jn 4:2-3).
       Faith in Antichrist does not result in eternal life. This is also


                        Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                          Misthologist@misthology.org
         corollary of the initial statement regarding non-saving faith since
         NHP ≠ HPJ.

                        Promised Redeemer in Focus




                                Digressive HPI
         In terms of this pictorial illustration, the OT light on the left points
forward to the Promised Redeemer who was to come. The light on the
right points backward to the Promised Redeemer who came. In the OT era,
people were saved by trusting in this coming Promised Redeemer. With
progressive clarity, more and more details were revealed about this
Promised Redeemer to bring Him more clearly into focus, even His name
as Immanuel was eventually given and His role as an atoning sacrifice was
indicated. When Jesus came, He was revealed as this HPI with crystal clear
focus and with an explosion of light. Therefore, in the illustration, moving
directly from left to right, blurry HPI becomes a clear HPJ when one
reaches the center where Jesus clearly is revealed to be the Christ in an
explosion of light via His resurrection.
         Inversely, while Jesus was on earth, the possibility of believing in
HPI without believing in HPJ grew fainter as more and more people heard
about Jesus. Thus, the blurry HPI placed vertically above HPJ in the
diagram (to signify as occurring in the same time period as HPI) has grown
fainter than the HPI located to the left before HPJ. In the years following

                         Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                           Misthologist@misthology.org
Jesus’ ministry, the possibility of believing in HPI without believing in
HPJ faded away to all but a theoretical possibility. It became increasing
impossible to believe in the person of the Promised Redeemer without
believing in the name of Jesus. So the blurry HPI to the right of HPJ has
faded even more. This migration and fading of HPI denotes the inverse
impact of progressive revelation on HPI. As revelation progresses to and
beyond HPJ, the possibility of being saved by HPI diminishes.
                              Non-focused NHP
         While there might have been some personifications of Sophia and
other mediums as useful means of pointing to the Christ, these non-
personal representations were focused insufficiently on the person of the
historical Jesus to suffice as an object for saving faith. These non-personal
representations of Christ are represented on in the illustration as NHP
(non-historical person). NHP is even more blurry than HPI and too out of
focus to provide a saving picture of Christ. Nevertheless, NHP at least
partially falls within the spectrum of light. While there might be some
NHP that was subsequent to HPJ and pointed back to HPJ (such as Gnostic
NHP), NHP is placed to the left of HPJ to denote the fact that the
introduction of many of these mediums historically proceeded HPJ and
pointed forward to HPJ.
                                 Non-lit HP2
         Antichrists arose denying the personal manifestation of Christ in
the flesh, and antichrist will arise conversely claiming to be Christ in the
flesh. These antichrists, whether they are NHP or HP2 respectively, fail as
objects of saving faith. They fall in the darkness completely outside of the
OT and NT sphere of light. They are blurred in the illustration since we do
not know in advance who they are. Still, they are definitely distinguishable
as historical people. They are placed on the right of HPJ to show that HP2
is predominately in the future.
                              Name = Person
         Progressive revelation clarified the target, but it did not change the
target. The object of saving faith always has been the historical person
known as the Promised Redeemer. “Of Him all the prophets bear witness
that through His name everyone who believes in Him receives forgiveness
of sins” (Acts 10:43).” Did they know Him by name—Jesus? No. But they
believed in Him whom we now know by this name today. They believed in
the same historical Person that we do today. Faith in this Person is the
proper grounds for saving faith, whether that Person was known by the
name Jesus or not.



                         Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                           Misthologist@misthology.org
                           Hypothetical Situations
          To consider the plausibility of these findings, let us consider some
hypothetical scenarios. What about someone who lived one hundred miles
away while Jesus was ministering on earth and who had only heard and
believed the OT message about HPI but died before hearing the NT
message about HPJ? Were they lost as a result failing to believe in the
name of Jesus? At what point in time, assuming one exists, did that OT
message cease to be saving? Did saving faith make a progression from
(1) having to believe that the Messiah would come to (2) having to believe
that He was there to (3) having to believe that He had come during that
point in history even if one had not heard that Messiah had come? Each
question must be answered negatively.
          Jesus did not cease to be the same historical person as time passed
by. It is not the name but the person represented by name that must be the
object of faith. For those who had not heard that name, hypothetically
speaking, they could still be saved by trusting in the person of the
Promised Messiah via the OT prophesies.8 When an OT believer heard the
message that Jesus had come, exegetical evidence suggests that they
promptly believed in Jesus. But suppose in some cases it took them a
couple of days before they came to believe that Jesus was the OT Messiah
in whom they had believed all this previous time. Was their salvation lost
or suspended during this interim period? No. For the sake of theological
speculation, suppose one of these HPI believers died the first day of
hearing the news of HPJ without coming to believe that Jesus was the
Promised Messiah in whom they already had savingly believed? Would
they lose their salvation? No. They already had been granted eternal life
via a properly grounded faith before their exposure to the name Jesus.
          Yet suppose others who had heard of HPI, like our hypothetical
Jewish woman at the well, and during the course of Jesus’ ministry, they
eventually came to believe that eternal life was to be had as a result of
simply believing in the Promised Messiah. Yet they still were not
persuaded that Jesus was the Promised Messiah. Maybe they just regarded
Jesus as a prophet who correctly clarified that eternal life was to be had by
trusting in the Promised Messiah. Could such people be saved? No. They
no longer could savingly trust in a coming Messiah without believing that
Jesus was that coming Messiah since the proclamation of Jesus required
that they trust in Him for eternal life. As a result of having heard this
proclamation and having met this Person, they were required to trust in this
Person for eternal life. To reject this Person as the object of their faith
would be to reject the Promised Messiah. They could not savingly believe
in the OT Promised Redeemer and yet disbelieve in Jesus. The progressive

8
    As noted in the vertical HPI.

                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
revelation as to who Jesus’ identity required that they believe the clear
revelation to the extent of placing their faith in Jesus as the promised
Messiah. They could not believe in the OT revelation about the Messiah
without believing that Jesus was that Messiah once they heard the clearer
revelation. Therefore, Jews today who have heard of Jesus cannot be saved
by the OT message without believing in Jesus because their having heard
the clearer revelation that Jesus is that Messiah makes it necessary for Jews
today who have heard about Jesus to believe that Jesus is that Messiah.9
                              Real Life Situations
          This position will bring up an interesting dilemma. Suppose a
liberal today believes that Jesus is the Messiah but does not believe in
Jesus’ literal resurrection. Does this lack of belief nullify the liberal’s faith
so that it cannot be saving faith? Evidently not. The same person is being
believed in, the historical Jesus, although some historical fact about that
Person is not being believed. For this reason, the proper deduction appears
to be that gnostic Christians and liberal Christians can be saved if they
believe in the historical Jesus for eternal life. Jews today who have heard
of Jesus cannot be saved simply via the OT message since they have heard
the NT message, but liberals (even Gnostic ones) can be saved despite the
progressive revelation that shows that this historical Person literally rose
from the dead if these liberals believe in this historical Person for eternal
life.
                                 Conclusion
         Believing any one historical fact about Jesus so as to uniquely
indentify Jesus as the historical person being believed in for eternal life
apparently would be sufficient grounds for salvation as long as competing
historical data did not lead one to believe in someone or something else
other than Jesus as the historical Person being believed in for eternal life.
The fundamental theorem herein is that saving faith must be in Jesus Christ
alone for eternal life. If a person believes in Jesus as the Christ and
simultaneously believes in someone or something else in addition to Jesus
as the Christ for eternal life, then such faith would fail to meet the
fundamental criteria. For this reason, saving faith must be limited to HPJ
or to an HPI that is implicitly or explicitly equivalent to HPJ. Faith in an
alternate HPI or in an additional HP2 or in a NHP would disqualify one for
saving faith. This observation explains why HPI ceases to be sufficient for
salvation after one has been exposed to the message which indentifies
Jesus as the name of the Messiah and why salvation cannot be found in any

9
 HPI pointed to HPJ up until the point of time that one encountered HPJ. After such an
encounter, a person who believed that HPI pointed to someone other than HPJ would
mistakenly transfer their faith in HPI to HP2. But faith in HP2 cannot save.

                           Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                             Misthologist@misthology.org
other name once a person has been exposed to the Messiah named Jesus.
Up until the point that the hearers of the OT message hear that Jesus is the
Messiah, the unified message they are contemplating would be regarding
an HPI that implicitly points them savingly to Jesus. However, after
encountering the historical Jesus, if they still seek salvation in a HPI other
than Jesus, then they are seeking salvation in someone other than Jesus—a
HP2 rather than the true HPI.
         This discussion simply has sought to explore the logical
possibilities. But supernatural limitations may yet need to be considered. A
person cannot come to saving faith in the Promised Redeemer apart from
the drawing of the Holy Spirit. Logic does not prevent one from
speculating that even today a person who has never heard the name Jesus
could still be presented with the OT message and Jn 3:16 and be led to
saving faith in Christ without knowing that His name is Jesus. HPI is a
valid theoretical possibility even today. But would the Holy Spirit honor
such an evangelistic message today that bypasses the name of Jesus? The
role of the Spirit is to draw people to Jesus as the Christ and glorify Jesus
as the Christ. Would the Spirit bypass the name of Jesus in drawing people
today to Christ?
         This proposal certainly seems counterintuitive. Surely no
Christian evangelist today would try such a twisted experiment so as to
avoid the name of Jesus in leading a person to Jesus. Theoretically, doing
so might be logically possible, but pragmatically it would be morally
reprehensible. Similarly, while logically it is not necessary to believe in the
resurrection in order to believe in Jesus as the Christ, it would be
thoroughly unacceptable evangelistically not to use the resurrection (the
greatest display of light) in bringing a person to Jesus as the Light. What
might be possible logically is not necessarily permissible morally.
Evangelists are under moral obligation to present the message of Jesus as
clearly and effectively as possible. Doing so necessarily means that they
must present Jesus as the resurrected Christ.10




10
     A related point might be made regarding the Deity of Christ.

                          Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                            Misthologist@misthology.org
