                          Samuel at Endor for Saul’s Bema
                                                      10/20/2022
Introduction
       My earliest recollection of writing a research paper was one dealing with the supposed summoning of Samuel
from the dead by the witch at Endor:
             7
               Then Saul said to his servants, “Seek for me a woman who is a medium, that I may go to her and
      inquire of her.” And his servants said to him, “Behold, there is a woman who is a medium at Endor.” 8 Then
      Saul disguised himself by putting on other clothes, and went, he and two men with him, and they came to
      the woman by night; and he said, “Conjure up for me, please, and bring up for me whom I shall name to
      you.” 9 But the woman said to him, “Behold, you know what Saul has done, how he has cut off those who
      are mediums and spiritists from the land. Why are you then laying a snare for my life to bring about my
      death?” 10 And Saul vowed to her by the LORD, saying, “As the LORD lives, there shall no punishment
      come upon you for this thing.”
             11
                Then the woman said, “Whom shall I bring up for you?” And he said, “Bring up Samuel for me.”
      12 When the woman saw Samuel, she cried out with a loud voice; and the woman spoke to Saul, saying,

      “Why have you deceived me? For you are Saul.” 13 And the king said to her, “Do not be afraid; but what
      do you see?” And the woman said to Saul, “I see a divine being [god] coming up out of the earth.” 14
      And he said to her, “What is his form?” And she said, “An old man is coming up, and he is wrapped with
      a robe.” And Saul knew that it was Samuel, and he bowed with his face to the ground and did homage
      [worshipped him]. 15 Then Samuel said to Saul, “Why have you disturbed me by bringing me up?” And
      Saul answered, “I am greatly distressed; for the Philistines are waging war against me, and God has departed
      from me and answers me no more, either through prophets or by dreams; therefore I have called you, that
      you may make known to me what I should do.”
             16 And Samuel said, “Why then do you ask me, since the LORD has departed from you and has

      become your adversary? 17 “And the LORD has done accordingly as He spoke through me; for the LORD
      has torn the kingdom out of your hand and given it to your neighbor, to David. 18 “As you did not obey the
      LORD and did not execute His fierce wrath on Amalek, so the LORD has done this thing to you this day.
      19 “Moreover the LORD will also give over Israel along with you into the hands of the Philistines, therefore

      tomorrow you and your sons will be with me. Indeed the LORD will give over the army of Israel into the
      hands of the Philistines!” 20 Then Saul immediately fell full length upon the ground and was very afraid
      because of the words of Samuel; also there was no strength in him, for he had eaten no food all day and
      all night. (1Sam 28:7-20)

       I was only in junior high or high school at the time I wrote that research paper and took the position that a demon
was impersonating Samuel. After all, several problematic questions arise if one accepts the authenticity of the account:
(1) Would God actually allow Samuel to return at the beckoning of a witch? (2) Would God allow the dead to return and
talk with the living regardless of the circumstances? (3) Was Samuel actually a divine being or god? (4) Why would
Samuel not rebuke Saul from worshipping him? (5) Would Samuel actually be an old man in his postmortem form?
       Fast forward some forty years later, and now I have several reasons to rethink that youthful reckoning. These
questions are certainly not insurmountable. The biblical record takes it for granted that it was Samuel who came up,
positively affirming five times that it was Samuel. The biblical writer seems to believe that it was Samuel and seems to
expect us to accept this exceptional occasion as authentic.
Commentators Affirm Divinity of the Apparition
      Various standard commentators take the text at face value, accepting the fact that it was indeed Samuel who
came forth. NIBC provides a nice summation:

      The church fathers believed that a demon impersonated Samuel and appeared to Saul. Others have thought
      that the medium was a fraud who tricked Saul into thinking that he saw Samuel. It seems best to follow the
      early view that this was a genuine appearance of Samuel which God Himself brought about. Several points
      favor this interpretation: (1) The medium was surprised (v. 12). (2) Saul identified the figure as Samuel
      (v. 14). (3) The message Samuel spoke was clearly from God (vv. 16–19). (4) The text says that the figure


                                             Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2022
                                               Misthologist@misthology.org
Worship of Samuel                                                                                                        Page 2
        was Samuel (vv. 12, 15, 16). There is no inherent difficulty with God bringing back the spirit of Samuel
        from Heaven and allowing him to appear to Saul, in spite of the woman’s evil profession. 1

My youthful objections to this conclusion have been superseded by scholarly reflection on the theological
implications of the text regarding its affirmation of Samuel’s deity, which dovetails into an assessment that I have
made regarding faithful believers in two of my books (DOLF, MMP5). 2

    •    Klein (WBC) affirms Samuel’s authenticity and deity:

        Perhaps, as Beuken suggests, Samuel beats the woman at her own game by coming up as a prophet of the
        living God before she could conjure up a dead ghost. In any case, when the woman saw Samuel, she
        screamed and immediately recognized Saul. Disguise or no disguise, prohibition of necromancy or not,
        there could be only one person who would want to see Samuel in these troubled times. For the second time
        (v 12; cf. v 9) she asked Saul why he was treating her in this way. Even the witch rejected the anointed king.
        The king tried to reassure her by telling her not to be afraid even though his own fear and his trembling
        heart had brought him to this extreme action. “What do you see?” he asked (cf. Yahweh’s questions of
        Amos in his visions, Amos 7:8; 8:2). The woman expected an ancestral spirit or a ghost, but she saw a
        divine being (v 13). These gods were coming up from the underworld. The king pressed on, forcing the
        woman to lay out the worst news on the table. The erect (or old) man was wrapped in a robe (v 14), the
        standard garb of Samuel (1 Sam 2:19; 15:27). That was enough to convince Saul, and he fell flat on the
        ground in subservience to the word of the prophet. 3

    •    Tsumura (NICOT) likewise affirms Samuel’s authenticity and deity:

                This suggests that something about Samuel’s appearance surprised the woman. Something
        unexpected might have happened outside her control after Saul asked her to bring up Samuel in v. 11b. One
        might surmise that some unknown thing happened before she shouted in a loud voice (v. 12a) and before
        she turned to Saul again in v. 12b.
                This was certainly an extraordinary event for her. It may be that the ordinary divining powers were
        not employed this time. Or, rather a power stronger than her divining powers might have been at work in
        bringing up the spirit of Samuel. Even if the spirit was brought up by her actions (see v. 15: “you disturbed
        me”), it might not have appeared or acted like the spirit(s) of the dead, like’ ôb or repā’îm, which she was
        comfortable handling as a necromancer.
                It should be noted that Samuel’s “coming up from the underworld” is “presented as an actual event,
        not a dream or a vision, even though dreams are explicitly mentioned by Saul.”
                …. The term’ ĕlōhîm (pl.: lit., “gods”), translated as “a divine being” (NRSV; NASB; JPS) or “a
        spirit” (NIV), takes here a plural predicate ‘ōlîm (“coming up”: part., m.pl.). So, it means “gods” or “divine
        beings” who are far from being on par with Yahweh. 4
                …. We are not told how Samuel appeared, but, as Beuken holds, there is no question that it is Samuel
        himself who speaks here. In his speech in vv. 16–19 Samuel uses the divine name, Yahweh, seven times,
        while Saul said “God” once. The author certainly intends us to believe it is really Samuel — only he would
        have been able to give that message — and we have to assume that God permitted the witch to call Samuel
        up in this case even though he might not normally have allowed it. 5

    •    Bergen (NAC) accepts Samuel’s authenticity but attributes his deity to pagan belief:


        1 Earl D. Radmacher, Ronald Barclay Allen, and H. Wayne House, Nelson’s New Illustrated Bible Commentary

(Nashville: T. Nelson Publishers, 1999), 381.
      2 DOLF = Degress of Love and Forgiveness. MMP5 = Misthological Models Part 5.
      3 Ralph W. Klein, 1 Samuel, vol. 10, Word Biblical Commentary (Dallas: Word, Incorporated, 1983), 271–272.
      4 David Tsumura, The First Book of Samuel, The New International Commentary on the Old Testament (Grand

Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 2007), 623–624.
      5 David Tsumura, The First Book of Samuel, The New International Commentary on the Old Testament (Grand

Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 2007), 627.
Worship of Samuel                                                                                                         Page 3
                Questions naturally arise at this point: Did the medium actually make contact with a living spirit-
        being, and if so, was it really the prophet Samuel? While this matter is not likely to be settled to everyone’s
        satisfaction, the following observations can be made. First, the plain statement of the Hebrew text is that
        she did in fact see Samuel. Second, the medium reacted to Samuel’s appearance as though it was a
        genuine—and terrifying—experience: she “cried out at the top of her voice.” Her strong reaction also
        suggests that Samuel’s appearance was unexpected; perhaps this was the first time she had ever actually
        succeeded in contacting the dead. Third, the speeches attributed to Samuel contained allusions to a prior
        interchange between the two, allusions that would have been appropriate only for the real Samuel to have
        made. Fourth, Samuel’s role and message as a prophet, so much a part of his ministry in life, was unchanged
        in his encounter with Saul here.
                Indeed, a straightforward reading of the biblical account suggests the possibility that mediums may
        possess the capacity to contact dead persons and establish lines of communication between the living and
        the dead. This view is not explicitly rejected elsewhere in Scripture; the Torah prohibits necromancy not
        because it is a hoax but because it promotes reliance on supernatural guidance from some source other than
        the Lord.
                An alternative reading of this passage suggests that it was not the skill of the medium but rather a
        unique act of God that brought Saul into contact with Samuel. The medium did not possess the capacity to
        disturb a dead saint; but God, as “a sign of his grace,” permitted Saul to have one last encounter with the
        prophet who had played such a determinative role in the king’s career.
                28:12–14 With the appearance of Samuel the medium came to understand that her customer was
        actually King Saul. Undaunted by the fact that his deception had been discovered, Saul asked the woman
        not to fear, but to continue with her task. The fact that he asked the medium what she could see suggests
        that Saul himself was prevented from viewing the spirit, though he was able to speak with the prophet
        directly. The woman claimed that she saw “gods arising from the earth” (v. 13; NIV, “a spirit coming up
        out of the ground”), perhaps from a pit in the room dug for the purpose of necromancy. The NIV’s rendering
        of the woman’s response masks the fact that the subject is ʾĕlōhîm, a word normally used to refer to a divine
        being and that the subject’s verb is plural, a situation that regularly occurs in the MT when a pagan god is
        the referent. In the present instance it seems reasonable to conclude that the medium’s words reflected a
        pagan belief that Samuel had become a “god”—a spirit-being possessing capabilities beyond those of
        mortals—following his death. The writer, wishing to demonstrate linguistically that she was speaking
        heretically, employed a plural verb form with the subject ʾĕlōhîm. 6

    •    Although Lange is skeptical of Samuel’s authenticity, he is astute to note the grammatical singularity:

                She answers: I see Elohim ascending out of the earth.—The word “Elohim” signifies here not a
        plurality of appearances (Gods, Sept., Vulg., Syr., Arab.—or spiritual beings, ghosts, Tremell.—or several
        devils, one of whom took the form of Samuel, S. Schmid—or angels, Chald., Theod.), but, despite the
        [Heb.] Plu. predicate (‫עֹ לִ ים‬, “ascending,” by attraction from the Plu. subst.), a single appearance, as is
        evident from the Sing. pronoun, “his form,” a spiritual appearance belonging to the region of the super-
        terrestrial, the superhuman, a fear- and terror-producing spiritual appearance. 7
                                                                                        6F




        At the very least, this supernatural being is superhuman. More precisely, he is a divine being (NAS), an elohim,
that is, a god. Lange rejects the plural of the KJV: “And the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the
earth.” A singular god is entailed: “And the woman said unto Saul, I see a god coming up out of the earth” (ASV,
so also BBE, CJB, DBY, ERV, GWN, JPS, NET, NLT, RSV). Angels can be called elohim/gods, of course. Did
Samuel look like an angel? If so, he did not act like an angel in that he allows something that angelic gods would
not permit. He allows himself to be worshipped! Could this godlike Samual actually be a god for whom worship
was truly appropriate?




      6 Robert D. Bergen, 1, 2 Samuel, vol. 7, The New American Commentary (Nashville: Broadman & Holman

Publishers, 1996), 266–268.
      7 John Peter Lange et al., A Commentary on the Holy Scriptures: 1 & 2 Samuel (Bellingham, WA: Logos Bible

Software, 2008), 332.
Worship of Samuel                                                                                                    Page 4
Devine Being
       Saul’s response to this godlike Samuel is glossed over by commentators. For example, Bergen simply remarks,
“Saul bowed down and prostrated himself with his face to the ground.” 8 Baldwell, though, adds a significant
acknowledgment: “Moreover, Saul knew intuitively that his request had been granted, and he prostrated himself before
Samuel as if before the Lord.” 9 Guess what prostrating yourself before a divine being as if before the Lord is normally
called? Worship! This Hebrew word (shachah), used by the biblical writer to describe Saul’s response, is used over
80 times in the OT to denote worship (per the NAS), which is its most prevalent usage. The Greek word used (proskuneo,
LXX) is the same word used in Revelation, where an angel forbids it in relation to himself: “And I, John, am the one who
heard and saw these things. And when I heard and saw, I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel who showed me
these things. And he said to me, ‘Do not do that’” (Rev 22:8-9). The angel forbade John to proskuneo/worship him.
Amazingly, though, Samuel did not forbid Saul from worshipping him as a divine being. Why?
       If this godlike being really was Samuel, as is frequently affirmed by commentators, then it is strange that they do
not follow through on the significance of Samuel’s not rebuking Saul for bowing to him in what is apparently an act of
worship of a divine being. Samuel rebuked Saul, to be sure, but not for worshipping him! This observation supports my
contention that overcomers will be worshipped. In DOLF, in a section entitled, Worship the Queen, I argued:

              A very interesting promise is made by Jesus to overcomers in Rev 3:9 that may have some bearing
       on our understanding of the Goddess status of the Queen. Many translations render proskuneo in this verse
       along the lines of: bow down, prostrate, give homage, do obeisance. The NAS is typical of this approach:
       “Behold, I will cause those of the synagogue of Satan, who say that they are Jews, and are not, but lie—
       behold, I will make them to come and bow down at your feet, and to know that I have loved you.”
       Overcomers are promised that this group of human beings will bow down before them. Many other
       translations, however, provide a much stronger rendering (ASV; BBE; ERV; GNV; KJV; NKJ; PNT; RWB;
       TNT; WEB). The NKJ is typical of this alternate approach: “I will make them come and worship before
       your feet, and to know that I have loved you.” This bowing down is a form of worship. That a group of
       human beings would be forced to worship glorified overcomers in Revelation is astonishing since twice
       John is told not to bow down in worship before an angel:

           •   And I fell at his feet to worship him. And he said to me, “Do not do that; I am a fellow
               servant of yours and your brethren who hold the testimony of Jesus; worship God. For
               the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.” (Rev 19:10).”
           •   And I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things. And when I heard and saw, I
               fell down to worship at the feet of the angel who showed me these things. 9 And he
               said to me, “Do not do that; I am a fellow servant of yours and of your brethren the
               prophets and of those who heed the words of this book; worship God” (Rev 22:8-9).

        John is instructed to worship God rather than the angel. No surprise there. This is consistent with our expectations.
Ever since the Ten Commandments, humans have been instructed to worship God alone, no other god or goddess.
Twenty-three of the twenty-four times proskuneo is used in Revelation, NAS renders it consistently as worship, as we
would expect. Yet in Rev 3:9, NAS is inconsistent and renders it as bow down. Why? Because there is a conflict in our
expectations. Which expectation should triumph, the expectation to render proskuneo as worship or the expectation that
we should only worship God? Could proskuneo actually mean worship? NICNT does not believe so: “To come and
worship is simply an Oriental metaphor that in this context involves no more than the acknowledgment that the church
is the object of Christ’s love and that with his return their faith in him will be vindicated.” WBC likewise concludes:
“This is an allusion to Isa 60:14, ‘all who despised you shall bow down at your feet,’ and perhaps also to Isa 49:23, ‘They
shall bow down before you and lick the dust of your feet.’” Phillips suggests other possible background texts, such as
this one: “Joseph found it true in his day. There came a day when the sun and the moon and the eleven stars bowed down
to him” (JPCS). In the case of Joseph, even the members of his family would be forced to bow down before him and
acknowledge his regality. Such commentators believe that simple bowing is imposed. On the other hand, Barnes (BNNT)
hedges his bets:


      8 Robert D. Bergen, 1, 2 Samuel, vol. 7, The New American Commentary (Nashville: Broadman & Holman

Publishers, 1996), 268.
      9 Joyce G. Baldwin, 1 and 2 Samuel: An Introduction and Commentary, vol. 8, Tyndale Old Testament

Commentaries (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1988), 170–171.
Worship of Samuel                                                                                                       Page 5

                     So far as the word is concerned, it may refer either to spiritual homage, that is, the
              worship of God; or it may mean respect as shown to superiors. If it is used here in the
              sense of divine worship properly so called, it means that they would be constrained to
              come and worship “before them,” or in their very presence; if it is used in the more general
              signification, it means that they would be constrained to show them honor and respect.
              The latter is the probable meaning; that is, that they would be constrained to acknowledge
              that they were the children of God, or that God regarded them with his favor. It does not
              mean necessarily that they would themselves be converted to Christ, but that, as they had
              been accustomed to revile and oppose those who were true Christians, they would be
              constrained to come and render them the respect due to those who were sincerely
              endeavoring to serve their Maker.

        Commentators who acknowledge that this passage is describing actual worship at the feet of the Bride are on the
right track. 10 The fact that this promise is made to overcomers in the book of Revelations suggests that their opponents
will be forced to acknowledge the regality of overcomers in a way that is normally reserved for God alone and thus is
inappropriate to render even to angels. However, because overcomers will be a higher order of being than angels and co-
rulers with Christ, it does not appear to be out of character for overcomers to be worshipped as Gods and Goddesses. As
I stated in DLOF:

               One day every created being will have to bow at the name of Jesus and acknowledge that He is Lord
      (Phil 2:9-11). The worship that everyone, including the Bride, will—willingly or unwillingly—render to
      Jesus will be shared by Jesus with the Bride. Those who oppose the Bride will be forced to come and bow
      down at Her feet and pay Her homage as a divine being. Opponents will be constrained to show these Gods
      and Goddesses the honor and respect due to such divine beings, to acknowledge that they are the divine
      Bride of Christ. This type of worship for those running the race is inappropriate now, for they are mere
      mortals (Acts 10:25-26). But once they have won the race and become a race of immortal Gods and
      Goddesses, this type of worship will be entirely appropriate for them then. In fact, at least in certain cases,
      it will be demanded. Christ will necessarily be worshipped as God. His Bride will necessarily be worshipped
      as a Goddess. Christ will demand it. This worship accorded to the Bride at Christ’s demand is yet more
      proof of Her superior divine nature and stature among the elohim.
              Joseph was second only to the supreme ruler—Pharaoh—who exalted Joseph to the fullest extent
      possible. Pharaoh even forced all others to bow the knee to Joseph (Gen 41:42-43). Joseph’s wife, Asenath,
      is named in Scripture (Gen 41:45). She went from being the daughter of a priest to become the wife of the
      second highest ruler of the land. Talk about a change in status! Typologically, Asenath represents the Bride
      of Christ. The focus in Scripture is on Joseph, as it should be, because he represents Christ, and the
      typological focus of the wedding in Ps 45 is accordingly on the Groom who represents Christ. The NT fills
      in more details about Christ’s Bride. From it, we learn that Christ will share His nature, glory, and throne
      with His Bride! Overcomers will sit on His throne (Rev 3:21) and be co-glorified with Him (Rom 8:17).
      These facts alone should have led commentators to deduce that the worships ascribed to overcomers in Rev
      3:9 is more than a mere homage to human beings. Overcomers cannot be co-glorified with Christ if He
      alone receives divine homage. Overcomers must share in the divine homage paid to Him if they are to be
      co-glorified with Him. Some believe that Joseph’s wife sat with him at his side and thus shared in some
      degree in his glory. This deduction is very reasonable. What is unreasonable is for commentators to fail to
      deduce that because Jesus’ Bride is co-gloried with Him as His co-ruler, she must be co-worshipped with
      Him, at least to some degree.
               Pharaoh’s great royal wife/principle wife/queen would appear before crowds and was pictured
      “enthroned on a dais decorated with all of Egypt’s enemies bound, literally under the king.” 11 Pharaohs
      made monuments of their wives for good reason: “There is no question that a revered, respected and



      10 Oliver B. Greene, The Revelation: Verse by Verse Study (Greenville, SC: The Gospel Hour, 1963), 124.

Theodore H. Epp, Practical Studies in Revelation, vol. 1 (Lincoln, Nebraska: Back to the Bible Broadcast, 1969), 168.
      11 See “Pharaoh’s Mudbrick Palace.” Available at https://thetorah.com/pharaohs-mudbrick-palace/. Accessed

2/3/2018.
Worship of Samuel                                                                                                        Page 6
       occasionally worshipped wife brought nothing but glory to her husband.” 12 To dishonor Pharaoh’s wife
       would be to dishonor Pharaoh. Since Joseph was to be treated as Pharaoh, surely Joseph’s wife was to be
       honored as Pharaoh’s wife. To do otherwise would be to dishonor Joseph. This is not rocket science. If a
       king has a queen whom he dearly loves and who sits with him on his throne, then it does not take a genius
       to figure out that if you dishonor her, you dishonor him. If he shares his throne with her, his honor with her,
       his rulership with her, and expects you to bow at His feet, then he will expect you to bow before her feet.
       Would you really want to risk your life by not bowing before her? Overcomers will be honored with
       worship; to do otherwise would be a dishonor to Christ. Since overcomers will be worshipped, we may
       deduce that they are Gods and Goddesses—a higher rank of divine beings than angelic gods and goddesses.
       Inversely, we may appropriately reason that since overcomers are a higher rank of divine beings than
       angelic gods and goddesses, overcomers may be worshipped. The probability of the latter deduction gives
       way to virtual certainty in the face of the previous deduction. Would you really want to bet your
       misthological life by refusing to acknowledge that deduction? Refusing to honor the Queen exegetically,
       might result in the displeasure of the King misthologically.

       In MMP5, I made further extrapolations regarding the divinity and worship of overcomers, suggesting that they
are 6D elohim, as opposed to lower-ranking 4D elohim, such as angels. Regardless of speculations regarding
dimensionality, deductions regarding the regality of overcomers are certain. And the implications of Rev 3:9 are that
bridal believers will be worshipped. Did God know that Saul would bow in worship if He allowed Samuel to come? Yes.
Yet God permitted it. And Samuel did not rebuke Saul, just as God foreknew would happen. God may have had multiple
reasons for allowing Samuel to come back. One reason could be so that we would properly deduce that postmortem
faithful believers will be worshipped by unfaithful believers. God may have intended for 1Sam 28:14 to be an early
typological signpost, pointing to the eschatological misthological worship promised in Rev 3:9.
Old Man
        When I shared my initial draft of this article with my friend, Keith Call, he inquired as to why Samual appeared
as an old man. My response was based on my belief in God’s middle knowledge and on the insights I have gained from
research regarding NDEs (near death experiences). During my research for MMP4 and MMP5, I observed that a standard
proposition of NDEs is that we will not be old in Heaven, even during the interim period. Most NDE affirmations would
say, for example, that upon death, the elderly return to the prime of their life and appear to be around thirty years old.
Therefore, the appearance of Samuel as an old man would seem problematic to such NDEs. Even so, in reading that type
of NDE genre, one occasionally encounters affirmations that postmortem believers can vary the age of their appearance
as they desire according to the circumstances.
        For example, suppose postmortem grandparents are meeting one of their grandchildren in Heaven during the
grandchild’s NDE. The grandchild has only known them as Grammie and Poppie. Rather than appear in a youthful form
that their grandchild would not recognize, they may choose to appear to their grandchild in a vibrant, healthy, older form
as Grammie and Poppie. Their appearance can be varied to match that attained during life.
        Similarly, knowing that Saul would ask about Samuel’s appearance as confirmation of Samuel’s identity, God
may have advised Samuel to appear in the form of an old man when he went up to meet Saul. Samuel’s youthful vigor
would remain intact despite his outward appearance, of course. Still, the outward appearance as an old man would give
the confirmation that Saul needed so that he would accept the authenticity of Samuel’s visit. Keith responded:

               This makes sense to me. If we examine the abilities of demons (the dispossessed spirits of the
       Nephilim), they seem to possess the ability to imitate voices and appearances. However, as my former
       theology professor, Dr. Fred Dickason, observed, they often don’t get the details right. For example, one
       might manifest but not display the folds of skin in the ear or the right color of eyes. But they can do it. If
       this is so for them as fallen beings, perhaps this is even more evident for glorified humans. 13

       Good point. Angels can vary their appearance (2Cor 11:14). Surely, overcomers will be like angels in that regard
and can do so as suits the situation. For that matter, perhaps one of the reasons that the disciples had trouble recognizing
Jesus after His resurrection was that He varied His voice and appearance slightly (Lk 24:16-31; Jn 20:14-16; 21:3-7). In

        12 See Jimmy Dunn, “Ramesses II: Anatomy of a Pharaoh His Family: (Specifically, his Women).” Available at

http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/ramesses2familygirls.htm. Accessed 2/3/2019. Some Egyptian queens even had
to rule as Pharaoh on occasion. See “Royal Women in Ancient Egypt.” Available at
http://www.womenintheancientworld.com/royal_women.htm. Accessed 2/3/2018.
13 Personal correspondence, 8/16/2022.
Worship of Samuel                                                                                                   Page 7
any event, I believe that overcomers can vary their appearance, their apparent age, their clothing, their radiance, and even
their form (wings versus no wings, for example). The appearance of Samual as a god who looked like an old man and
who could accept worship is no obstacle to my more mature reflection these forty-some years later. Samual’s authentic
appearance to Saul is no more problematic than Moses and Elijah’s appearance to Jesus (Mt 17:3).
Conclusion
        Worshipping angels is inappropriate. However, we know from Rev 3:9 that the worship of postmortem faithful
believers by unfaithful believers is appropriate and will take place on occasion. Indeed, Christ will require it. We can
also infer from 1Sam 28:14 that a foretaste of that type of worship has been recorded as a typological signpost pointing
to this future fulfillment. Even in his intermediate state, Samuel apparently appeared as a god and was worshipped as a
god. In contrast to an angelic god who rejected such worship, Samuel took this worship in stride without rebuking Saul
for rendering such worship. Instead, Samuel’s rebuke is focused on Saul being stripped of regality: “And the Lord has
done accordingly as He spoke through me; for the Lord has torn the kingdom out of your hand and given it to your
neighbor, to David” (1Sam 28:17).
        Typologically, this passage is a picture of Saul’s Bema. Samuel’s pronouncement of judgment on Saul
prefigures the Judgement Seat of Christ, where unfaithful believers will be stripped of their provisional regality by
a pronouncement that results in their being cast into the outer darkness. They will lose the regality that could have
been theirs otherwise, and they will be placed in a location of confinement. 14 At the same time, they will be forced
to worship those faithful believers whom they have mistreated. Faithful believers will be worshipped as Gods and
Goddesses by those who mistreated them.
        The LXE renders 1Sam 28:14 as: “And Saul knew that this was Samuel, and he stooped with his face to the earth,
and did obeisance to him” (proseku,nhsen auvtw/|). BBE says: “He gave him honour.” In view of the immediate context
and theological implications, a better translation would be: “And Saul knew that it was Samuel, and he bowed with his
face to the ground and worshipped him” (1Sam 28:14; TM). It cannot be accidental or incidental that Saul’s worship
of Samuel as a god was allowed by God. For those who can follow the breadcrumbs, the trail is not that hard to
follow. For those who are slow to follow, the birds of the air will have little difficulty removing the breadcrumbs
from their path so that they can proceed along, oblivious to the regality that could be theirs if they were to follow
the breadcrumbs to their proper conclusion.




14 Samual likewise tells Saul: “Tomorrow you and your sons will be with me” (1Sam 28:19). Thus, Saul would die

and join Samual in the confiments of Sheol, consequently in Paradise but outside of the Heavenly City, thereby
plausibly foreshadowing the misthological death that unfaithful believers will experience at the Bema resuling in
their living in Paradise outside the Heavenly City. See MMP4 and MMP5 for pictures of the heavenly paradise
outside the Heavenly City. For further discussion of presumptive rewards, see MMP5.
