                            Seven Ways God Answers Prayer
                                                          3/12/2017

                                                       Introduction
       As a rule, the blogs by GES are thoroughly enjoyable. However, a blog by Shawn Lazar on February 13, 2017,
entitled, “Pray Without Doubting,” raised some concerns. 1 Lazar relates an event where a pastor’s son was dying. Surgery
had been planned but had not taken place. In a state of emergency, the pastor called for some of the local elders to come
pray for his son and claim the promise of James 5:14-15: “Is anyone among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the
church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer offered in faith will
restore the one who is sick, and the Lord will raise him up, and if he has committed sins, they will be forgiven him.”
       Lazar had an opportunity to confirm that miraculous healing had ensued without the need of surgery.
Consequently, while reflecting on James 1:5-8, Lazar concluded that for prayer to be answered, it must be prayed in faith
without any doubting. After all, the passage states, “But if any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all
men generously and without reproach, and it will be given to him. But let him ask in faith without any doubting, for the
one who doubts is like the surf of the sea driven and tossed by the wind. For let not that man expect that he will receive
anything from the Lord, being a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.” Lazar then shared a personal testimony
of his own struggle in this area:

                 Frankly, my prayers are often mixed with doubts, especially when I’m praying for relatively “big”
         things, miraculous things. For example, my wife was diagnosed with Hashimoto’s disease. I pray for God
         to heal her. But I can’t say my prayers are not without doubt. I think I qualify as a “double-minded man”
         in that case. I believe, and yet I don’t. In which case, according to James, I should not expect to “receive
         anything from the Lord.”

        He then shares “four types of doubt that can prevent you from praying the prayer of faith,” thus preventing you
from having your prayers answered. He seeks to eliminate these doubts to conclude: “Here’s the answer—study the
promises of God. That’s how you can know God’s will. If God has promised to do something, and that’s what you’re
praying for, then you can be fully persuaded that it’s His will to answer your prayer” (emphasis his). So let us ask the
rather obvious question, “Is the healing of Lazar’s wife God’s will?” If we are to base our answer solely on the impression
conveyed by Lazar in the blog, then the answer would seem to be a resounding, “Yes!” Physical healing is always God’s
will. Just call for the elders of the church and have them pray for such healing. This seems to be Lazar’s premise based
on this Jacobian promise read in isolation from the rest of Scripture. All Lazar should have to do is call for the local
elders to pray for her healing, and he should be able to have 100% confidence that the prayer will be answered because
Jam 5:14-15 promises this will be the case. Is this a psychologically healthy conclusion? Is this a biblically reasonable
conclusion?
                                                     Points of Concern
       The ugly inverse of this conclusion is that if Lazar calls for the elders of the church to pray for her and the healing
does not ensue, then he can be 100% confident that the reason is because the elders could not muster up enough faith to
get God to act. Obviously, this conclusion has some very serious implications. My own wife has just had to have a
mastectomy this past year, plus radiation and chemo, because of her stage-three breast cancer. Should we conclude that
the reason she had to have this surgery, radiation, and chemo was because all the prayers offered for her fell short of
being prayed in faith? Lazar apparently assumes this to be the case. When I challenged his blog, he responded: “If God
has promised something, conditioned on our faith, and that something does not come about, it [would] seem the first
thing we should consider is whether or not we are actually praying in unbelief.” I object.
       Should I have just told my wife that we were going to forgo having the surgery, radiation, and chemo and just
trust God to heal her? Is that what trusting God 100% would look like? Is that what is necessary to get God to act? During
this same time period, I learned that a pastor acquaintance of mine had apparently done just that—he did not take the
treatment—and now he is eaten up with cancer. If Lazar is advocating a trust-God-not-medicine interpretation, then his
false dichotomy can be quite deadly. To add insult to injury, given Lazar’s premise about God’s promise, we should
presume that the reason this pastor is dying is because he and his elders do not have enough faith to cause God to act.
Indeed, some people take that approach and assume that if your child or spouse is dying because of an illness, then it is
your fault for not having had enough faith to move God to heal. If they die, their blood is on your hands, and you must
1
    See https://faithalone.org/blog/pray-without-doubt.

                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2017
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
Seven Ways God Answers Prayer                                                                                        Page 2
live with the consequences of your failure. Lazar’s approach can be psychologically damaging and physically deadly.
        Elsewhere, thankfully, Lazar will refute this God-only mentality. In a 2015 review of Mark Lenz’s book, God’s
Providence, he notes that Lenz believes “that God rarely intervenes in a direct and miraculous way. The classic case
would be an illness. If we get ill, it would be wrong to expect to be instantly healed by God without availing ourselves
of physicians and medicines.” 2 Lazar recommended the book. In that same issue of JOTGES, Lazar also gave a review
of Gene Edward’s book, God at Work. Once again, Lazar comments: “There are many religious groups who consider it
a lack of faith to take someone to see a doctor. They want God to heal, and they understand God’s healing solely in
miraculous terms.” But he points out that this could be “tantamount to superstition.” In any event, he says that we should
“see modern medicine as part of God’s providential care for the world.” He “highly recommended” this book. 3 To use
the terminology Lazar used back in 2015, these books, and his judgment then, should be used to balance the superstitious
approach he takes in his 2017 blog.
        In this blog, Lazar thinks that he should not expect for his wife to be healed because his prayers are not offered in
faith without any doubting. If I agreed with his discussion, which I do not, then I would have to conclude the same thing
concerning my wife. I had no right to expect God to heal my wife. Yet, far to the contrary, the reality was I expected God
to heal my wife! I had hoped and prayed that He would do so without her having to undergo the treatment. But the tests
showed that He had not. So we had to make a decision as to whether to proceed with the medical treatment. We proceeded.
Once again, my wife and I, among many others, prayed that the treatment would be successful. The result? Her MRI last
month has pronounced her to be cancer free. God answered our prayers for healing via the medical treatment. Did I have
a right to expect God to do so? Yes, per Lazar’s 2015 book reviews. But no, per Lazar’s 2017 blog. Because I did not
pray with 100% certainty that God would grant the healing for which we prayed, I had no right to expect God to hear our
prayers according to the blog. We were prepared to trust God with the results if the healing we requested did not occur,
even if it resulted in her death. According to Lazar’s new superstitious approach, however, such prayers are not examples
of faith but of doubt. Per the blog, we did not receive anything from God. All praise goes to the doctors, I suppose, for
the healing. God had nothing to do with it, according to the blog. For be it from me, however, to draw such a conclusion
from Jam 1:5-8 and 5:14-15. Better conclusions are available. But to get to them, we need to work our way, thoughtfully,
through Lazar’s underlying assumptions.
                                                    Four Types of Doubt
        As mentioned above, Lazar states in the blog that four types of doubt can prevent our prayers from being answered.
The first type of doubt he poses is that we might doubt that God hears our prayers. Lazar wrongly concludes that this
doubt has no basis in reality since, according to him, “If you are a believer, God hears every word you say.” Supposedly,
we can draw near to God in prayer, confident that He will hear us, just because we are believers. To the contrary, in well-
known passages, the Bible comes to a different conclusion: “If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear;
but certainly God has heard; He has given heed to the voice of my prayer” (Ps 66:18-19). “But your iniquities have made
a separation between you and your God, and your sins have hidden His face from you, so that He does not hear” (Is 59:2).
The Lord will not hear believers if they hold on to sin in their hearts. In defense of Jesus, the blind man whom the Lord
healed argued: “We know that God does not hear sinners; but if anyone is God-fearing, and does His will, He hears him”
(Jn 9:31). Pretty good argument for a blind man! James would concur. For this reason, he urges: “Confess your sins to
one another, and pray for one another, so that you may be healed” (Jam 5:16). Accordingly, one of the very verses that
Lazar cites in this section refutes his notion that God always hears the prayers of believers with an inclination to answer
them just because they are believers. To the contrary, God’s listening to our prayers is conditioned on our dealing with
sin in our lives. Therefore, the presumption cannot be made that just because you ask in faith without any doubting that
your prayer will be answered. The very context of passage Lazar cites indicates that sin could keep God from hearing us,
in the sense of answering our prayer. No matter if you pray in faith, your prayer could still not be answered if unconfessed
sin remains hidden. Peter likewise says, “For the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and His ears attend to their
prayer, but the face of the Lord is against those who do evil” (1Pet 3:12). Contrary to Lazar, even if you pray in faith
with 100% confidence that the Lord is going to answer your prayer, then your prayer may fall on deaf ears if you harbor
sin in your heart. For that matter, Peter also warns husbands: “Live with your wives in an understanding way, as with a
weaker vessel, since she is a woman; and grant her honor as a fellow heir of the grace of life, so that your prayers may
not be hindered” (1Pet 3:7). John is also clear that being a believer is not sufficient grounds for us to know that God will
hear us. For we must pray according to His will: “And this is the confidence which we have before Him, that, if we ask
anything according to His will, He hears us. And if we know that He hears us in whatever we ask, we know that we have
the requests which we have asked from Him” (1Jn 5:14-15). As believers we must live in God’s will and pray in His will
to have legitimate confidence that He will answer our prayers.

2
    Shawn Lazar, JOTGES 28:54 (Spring 2015), 89.
3
    Ibid., 93-94.
Seven Ways God Answers Prayer                                                                                          Page 3
        The second source of doubt that Lazar notes is that we could doubt God’s ability to answer our prayer. However,
in a note, he concedes that if we ask God to do something that is logically impossible, then praying in faith will not result
in the prayer being answered. Also, as I discussed in my book, 4D Forgiveness, some things are morally impossible for
God. Thus, if we ask Him to do these things, He cannot do them, no matter how much faith we have. Once again, the
prayer of faith could be frustrated. Lazar contends that you cannot pray for something that is unbiblical and “be fully
persuaded in your mind” that He will do so. Really? Why not? Disconnects between what the Bible says and what people
believe happen all the time. They could believe that God has promised them something, like prosperity, and be fully
persuaded that He will grant it, and yet be greatly mistaken.
        The third source of doubt that Lazar lists is that we could doubt God’s goodness to us personally. God might be
good to others, but how can we be certain that He will be good to us? One passage Lazar cites to counter this doubt is Ps
35:27, where David tells us that God “delights in the prosperity of His servant.” Lazar advises: “Continually repeat out
loud that God delights in the prosperity of His servant. Do that until that truth finally sinks in, and you become fully
persuaded of it.” Does this persuasion validate the prosperity gospel? I doubt it. Frankly, I do not believe that this verse
is intended to be a blanket statement covering every situation so that we can fault any believer who is not experiencing
prosperity as being a faith flunky. In fact, in the Hall of Faith, the writer of Hebrews praises God’s servants who were
destitute as a result of the persecution they endured (Heb 11:37). Far from being faith flunkies, they were faith heroes.
        Fourth, according to Lazar, we could doubt that God will answer our prayer, which is where it really gets personal,
as Lazar relates:
              This is the big one for me, the one that I struggle with the most. I believe God can answer my prayer,
       if He wanted to. I’m just not sure that He wants to. In fact, I probably mostly doubt that He does. Is that
       your problem too? Do you doubt that God wants to answer your prayers? Then you and I need to know
       what God’s will is. But how do we do that? (Emphasis his.)

Merely believing that God can answer your prayer is to doubt God’s goodness, according to Lazar. Real faith is to believe
that He will answer your prayer. I was interrupted at this point in my typing by my wife telling me that her mother’s
declining mind has gotten too bad for her mother to be able to cook reliably for herself. So what should we do? Call for
the elders of the church to pray for her? Given Lazar’s blog, one would think that the proper course of action would be
for us not do anything practically to help her because this would be a lack of faith. We should just pray for her, and then
let her fend for herself. Nonsense. The book reviews that Lazar provided back in 2015 give a much wiser course of action.
We will call our local meals on wheels to see if they can help, and we will provide cooked food for her ourselves. As to
James, I believe he would approve. Faith is expected to work (Jam 2:15-17). We are to be hands that God uses to answer
our prayers for providing the healthcare her mother needs.
        Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego believed that God was able to deliver them and that He would: “Our God
whom we serve is able to deliver us from the furnace of blazing fire; and He will deliver us” (Dan 3:17). Nevertheless,
they immediately go on to add: “But even if He does not, let it be known to you, O king, that we are not going to serve
your gods or worship the golden image that you have set up” (Dan 3:18). So which is it? Is this an example of doubt or
of faith? The logical inference of the blog is that this a picture of doubt. They were 100% persuaded that God had the
ability to save them, and they had the positive expectation that He would, but they were not 100% persuaded that He
would. They left open the possibility that He might not, for reasons of His own. So what happened? Did God let them
burn to teach us that merely being fully persuaded that He can answer our prayer gives us no right to expect that He will
answer our prayer? No! God miraculously saved them in splendid fashion. They are heroes of faith, for whom God
“quenched the power of fire” (Heb 11:34).
        I think the attitude of Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego is the attitude my wife and I had as we faced her cancer:
(1) We knew without a doubt that God could heal her. And (2) we had the positive expectation that He would heal her.
Nevertheless, we were not as fully persuaded of the latter as we were the former because we knew that there was biblical
precedence for concluding that sometimes God chooses to deliver us through suffering rather than from suffering. Also,
sometimes God chooses not to grant healing. Contrary to the false dichotomy that Lazar poses, this did not mean that we
doubted God’s goodness toward us personally.
                                      Problematic Texts for Faulty-Faith Premise
       Lazar’s presumption was that faith texts, which promise that God will answer our prayers if we have faith, give
us grounds for concluding that the lack of answer to our prayers would probably be attributed to our lack of faith rather
to God’s will. I raised objections from several passages that make his conclusion problematic:

       1. Paul prayed that the thorn in his flesh might be removed, which is frequently thought to include some
       form of physical problem. Should he have called for the elders of the church to pray for him with the
Seven Ways God Answers Prayer                                                                                         Page 4
       assurance that this meant that his prayer would be answered. Or, considering Jesus’ promise in a passage
       like Mk 11:24, should we conclude that Paul’s faith must have been deficient since his prayer was not
       answered?
       2. Why did Paul leave Trophimus sick in Miletus (2Tim 4:20) if the prayers of elders or individuals offered
       in faith are supposed to be a 100% grantee of answered prayer?
       3. Why did Paul tell Timothy to drink a little wine for the sake of his stomach and frequent sickness in
       1Tim 5:23? Was it because Paul and Timothy and their elders did not have enough faith to pray in faith so
       that God would heal him?
       4. Why was Paul so fearful that the Thessalonians might be upset in their faith in 1Thess 3:1-5? Was it
       because he did not have the faith to believe that God would answer his prayers that their faith would stand
       firm?

        In response, Jim Poulos responded: “Paul’s prayer was not answered not because of lack of faith but because the
Lord had purposes in Paul’s life he was not able [to] see until the Lord revealed it to him.” But that response concedes
the argument. Contrary to Lazar, the reason Paul’s prayer was not answered was because of God’s will, not because of
Paul’s lack of faith. I pointed out that Poulos response “proves my point splendidly. Sometimes our prayers are not
answered the way we had hoped, and it is not because of our lack of faith. We should be sensitive to the Spirit as to what
to pray and why our prayers may not be answered as we had hoped. God may have other purposes at play.”
        I went on to ask, “Does a passage such as James 5:14-15 mean that if prayer by elders for physical healing is not
answered with physical healing, then those expressing the prayer are to be faulted with lack of faith?” Lazar’s blog
indicates that faulty faith is presumably the problem if the prayer for healing is not granted. I am not so quick to assume
that faulty faith is the problem. Lazar seems to limit God’s answer to our prayers to yes or no, with faith being the deciding
factor. I would contend instead that frequently other viable factors may determine the answer and that the answers are
not always a simple yes or no. I perceive at least seven ways in which God answers our prayers.
                                         Seven Ways that God Answers Prayer
        1. No
        To be sure, God may answer our prayers with a “no.” However, His negative response may not be due to our lack
of faith but to our lack of faithfulness. As already noted, unconfessed sin could be the cause. Alternatively, confessed sin
can be caused. David confessed his sin. The Lord forgave him (2Sam 12:13). Nevertheless, the Lord said that his child
would die as a result of his sin. David thought that the Lord might be gracious anyway and spare his child if he fasted
and prayed: “Who knows, the Lord may be gracious to me, that the child may live” (2Sam 12:22). If David had more
faith and had thought instead, “The Lord will be gracious to me so that the child will live,” would his prayer for healing
have been granted? No. The reason his prayer was not answered was not his lack of faith, but God’s will to the contrary.
Jesus says, “Ask, and it will be given to you” (Mt 7:7). Is that an unqualified promise? In that context, it seems to be.
Indeed, James says, “You do not have because you do not ask” (Jam 4:2). But he immediately goes on to add: “You ask
and do not receive, because you ask with wrong motives, so that you may spend it on your pleasures” (Jam 4:3). So who
are we to believe: Jesus or James? Both, obviously. Nevertheless, Jesus did not add any qualifier to His statement but
James does. In like manner, the fact that James does not list any other qualifications other than faith in Jam 5:14-15 does
not mean that no other qualifications exist. For one thing, the previous context in Jam 4:2-3 makes it clear that proper
motives are certainly a factor. Moreover, the very passage in Jam 5:14-15 implies that confessing one’s sin is also a
potential prerequisite for the prayer to be answered with a “yes.” One might add that forgiving the sins of others also
appears to be a requirement (Mk 11:25).
        2. No...But
       The implication of Mt 7:9-11 is that God will not give His children negative things. So if a child asks for something
that could be harmful, God could answer the prayer by saying, “No, but I will give you something else.” Frequently, we
are surprised by the way God answers our prayers. We do not get exactly what we asked for, or God does not answer our
prayers in the way we expected. God may answer our prayers negatively in not giving us exactly what we ask for but
positively in still giving something related, and perhaps even better, even “exceeding abundantly beyond all that we ask”
(Eph 3:20).
       3. Yes
       On the other hand, the most straightforward way for God to answer our prayers in Mt 7:9-11 is to give us the good
thing we ask for in just the way we ask it.
      4. Yes...But
      Inversely related to the no-but answer, God may answer our prayers with a yes...but. God threatened to wipe out
Seven Ways God Answers Prayer                                                                                            Page 5
Israel for their sin. But Moses prayed that the Lord would forgive them. “So the Lord said, ‘I have pardoned them
according to your word; but....surely all the men who have seen My glory and My signs, which I performed in Egypt
and in the wilderness, yet have put Me to the test these ten times and have not listened to My voice, shall by no means
see the land which I swore to their fathers, nor shall any of those who spurned Me see it” (Num 14:20-23). God answered
his prayer positively but added some negative caveats.
       5. Yes...And
       Inversely related to the latter half of the yes-but response, God may answer our prayers with a yes...and: “And
God said to Solomon, ‘Because you had this in mind, and did not ask for riches, wealth, or honor, or the life of those who
hate you, nor have you even asked for long life, but you have asked for yourself wisdom and knowledge, that you may
rule My people, over whom I have made you king, wisdom and knowledge have been granted to you. And I will give
you riches and wealth and honor, such as none of the kings who were before you has possessed, nor those who will come
after you” (2Chron 1:11-12).
      6. Yes....If
       Sometimes God answers our prayers contingently: “Now He was telling them a parable to show that at all
times they ought to pray and not to lose heart” (Lk 18:1). Like Jacob who said, “I will not let you go unless you
bless me” (Gen 32:26), sometimes we have to persevere in believing prayer if we are to get what we ask for.
Consequently, we have to wait. Einstein gave the definition of insanity as doing the same thing over and over again
and expecting a different result. Well, if that is the case, then this is a crazy faith. You keep praying over and over
again, despite the Lord’s not granting your request, in the belief that He will answer your prayer if you keep asking.
In fact, some would council that once you have made your request, you should stop asking and start thanking—
thanking God for having granted your request.
        7. Yes...eventually
        Some would abbreviate this discussion by saying that God answers prayers in three ways: no, yes, and wait.
But we miss some of the nuances by limiting ourselves to just three responses. Sometimes God answers our prayers
eventually but not contingently. For example, my father, Al Cauley, is a retired Southern Baptist minister. I called
him to discuss this article while I was writing it because he has had many instances of answered prayer. During the
course of his ministry, he has seen miraculous answers to his prayers many times when he claimed Mt 18:19-20 (or
Jam 5:14-15). For example, he and a prayer partner claimed Mt 18:19-20 on behalf of a young woman whom the doctors
said would never walk again. A week later she walked out of the hospital. Sometimes the answers to his prayers involved
God using medical means; sometimes the answers to his prayers came without God using medical means. Sometimes
how God used medical means was miraculous. For instance, ten years ago, he was scheduled to have surgery for five
aneurysms. He went to have the surgery, but the surgeon declined to perform the surgery, explaining that my dad was
going to die either way. That surgeon would not perform the surgery, but God intervened and another surgical team did
so, performing a medical miracle.
        Many times my father has seen miraculous answers. But twice he and a prayer partner have claimed Mt 18:19-20
and prayed for physical healing of a believer and that healing was not granted? Why? On various occasions, he has made
it clear that, when claiming Mt 18:19-20, the prayer of faith he is exercising is dependent solely upon his faith and the
faith of his prayer partner, not upon the faith of the one for whom they are praying. Were these two exceptions attributable
to his lack of faith and that of his prayer partner? We don’t believe so. The first occasion was that of a very godly woman
who was dying of cancer. Despite the prayer of faith offered on her behalf, she died a few days later. When she died, my
dad recalled something she had said previously: “Whether or not the Lord heals me, I have perfect healing.” 4 Afterwards,
it occurred to him that, in dying, she had obtained perfect healing, that is, a healing that does not to take place in this life,
but in the life to come. Those having near death experiences have described seeing the healing that takes place when
someone reaches Heaven. The health and youth of those who have died are restored when they reach Heaven. This
healing is not contingent upon the believer’s prayer. It is guaranteed to all believers. Perfect healing will be granted to all
believers...eventually.
        Nevertheless, some prayers that may not be answered until we reach heaven can be contingent upon our
faithfulness. Piper tells the story of a missionary who prayed that God would send her a husband, who never came:



4
  The same would be true of the other exception to the rule that God has answered my dad’s prayers of faith when prayed
jointly according to Mt 18:19-29. The woman died, but she was a believer; hence, she received perfect healing rather
than the requested physical healing.
Seven Ways God Answers Prayer                                                                                           Page 6
       Miss Aylward talked to the Lord about her singleness. She was a no-nonsense woman in very direct and
       straightforward ways and she asked God to call a man from England, send him straight out to China, straight
       to where she was, and have him propose to me.” I can’t forget the next line. Elisabeth Elliot said, “With a
       look of even deeper intensity, she shook her little bony finger in my face and said, ‘Elisabeth, I believe God
       answers prayer. And he called him.” And here there was a brief pause of intense whisper. She said, “He
       called him, and he never came.” 5

         Are the prayers of such missionaries not answered because they do not have sufficient faith? I am highly skeptical
that that is the case. This particular response by Aylward affirms free will. The man whom God called had the free will
to resist the call, and he exercised that free will to do so. Before we appeal to middle knowledge to suppose that God can
always manipulate our circumstances to get what He wants, let us be reminded that, as already pointed out, there are
some things that God cannot do because they are logically or morally impossible. If God were to override free will, would
it still be free will? The plain fact of the matter is that God does not always use middle knowledge to circumvent freewill
responses to give all His faithful believing servants a spouse in this life. Does this mean that their prayers will remain
eternally unanswered? No! My contention in Monogamous Sex in Heaven is that believers who are faithful will have a
heavenly soulmate. The perfect soulmate will be granted to faithful believers...eventually. The answer to their prayers
will be “exceeding abundantly beyond” what they asked for...eventually (Eph 3:20).
                                                 Toward Reconciliation
        So how do we reconcile Jam 1:5-8 and 5:14-15? Lazar’s approach is to assume that the prayer for healing must be
offered in faith that God will heal presently, not merely eventually in eternity. The requirement is 100% certainty, not
mere positive expectancy. To merely believe that God can heal or is positively inclined to heal in response to our prayers
is a form of doubt, not faith. Another blogger, Tim Challies, sees the matter differently:

              Our prayers cannot be separated from our faith. If we are to ask God, we must ask with expectancy,
       believing in our heart of hearts that God can and will give what we desire, provided that what we desire is
       really what we need and what will bring glory to Him! We are to ask with confidence and expectancy,
       praying out of the faith He has given us. 6

       Challies’ explanation is much closer to mark in describing the type of faith my wife and I had as we prayed for
her healing and, I might add, a very good description of the type of faith evidenced by Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-
nego. Positive expectancy that God would grant the requests, rather than absolute certainty, was all that was necessary
for God to act on these occasions. Notwithstanding, for reasons given above, we cannot assume that such positive
expectancy is a guarantee that God will always grant our requests, especially in the time or manner anticipated. For this
reason, prayers of faith frequently fall short of 100% certainty. Unfortunately, some in GES box themselves into thinking
that anything short of 100% certainty is an example of doubt, not faith. Others in the GES, such as myself, believe that
faith can exist in degrees. Positive expectancy might be considered a high degree of certainty that falls short of 100%
certainty.
       Sometimes God clearly responds positively to such faith, even when it falls way short 100% certainty. For
instance, my dad and a prayer partner claimed Mt 18:19-20 on behalf of a man who was dying of leukemia. The man
only had six months to live and was literally about to go crazy. Nevertheless, my dad and his prayer partner prayed for
the man to be saved. When he went to visit him, God opened the way and had him in his right mind. The man trusted
Christ for free gift of eternal life. Then my dad told him that baptism was not required, but if God were to heal him, he
should follow up in baptism. Two months later he had left the hospital healed. They did not pray for his healing. They
did not necessarily believe the Lord would heal him; they were just open to the possibility. Yet the Lord responded
positively to that grain of faith.
       This is not to say that my dad’s prayers have always been answered affirmatively. Many of his personal prayers
have been answered affirmatively; many have not been. He does not understand why. I do not consider this surprising:
“For now we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to face; now I know in part, but then I shall know fully just as I also
have been fully known” (1Cor 13:12). Our present knowledge of how to rectify these discrepancies is only partial. One
day we will have perfect knowledge and will be able to provide better answers than we can currently.
       Even so, I will venture an explanation that might be at least partially helpful. My dad did not invoke Mt 18:19-20
willy-nilly. He depended upon the subjective leadership of the Spirit as when to invoke this prayer and when not to,

5
 http://www.desiringgod.org/interviews/why-are-women-more-eager-missionaries.
6
 Tim Challies, “Six Ways to Hinder Your Prayers” http://www.challies.com/christian-living/six-ways-to-hinder-your-
prayers. Accessed 3/11/2017.
Seven Ways God Answers Prayer                                                                                         Page 7
which is what the Bible refers to as being “led by the Spirit” (Rom 8:14; Gal 5:18). While I was reading Lazar’s blog, I
was also reading a book entitled, “Who’s Afraid of the Holy Spirit?” The authors of this book criticize GES for limiting
the leadership of the Spirit to the propositions of Scripture. They contend instead:

              The Holy Spirit’s guidance is still needed in discerning the will of God. The rationalism in our
       circles makes decision-making a purely cognitive exercise. There is no place for prayer. There is no room
       for the Spirit. I believe there is a middle ground between expecting daily revelations, on the one hand, and
       basing decisions solely on logic and common sense on the other. I may not receive revelations, but I do
       believe that the Spirit often guides me with inarticulate impulses. 7 (Emphasis original.)

       Thus, the inner witness of the Spirit is supra-logical, not sub-logical—like the peace from God that
       surpasses all understanding. 8 (Emphasis original.)

               When in 1998, my late wife was diagnosed with liver cancer it turned our lives upside down. After
       being together for nearly forty years this was sobering to say the least. We had friends who were
       cessationists and friends who were charismatics. There were those praying for my late wife and me who
       were careful not to embarrass God by asking too much and putting him on the spot. We listened as others
       ordered God to help us as if somehow he were our opponent. We believed in healing and miracles. But we
       had no faith in miracle-workers and healers. We were praying for healing by any means God so desired. As
       time passed we learned so much more about the Lord through that experience. We were blessed by the
       witness of the Holy Spirit as we walked through that trial. He comforted us during our encounters with our
       human frailty. We were blessed by the enduring fellowship of the saints, an obvious work of the Holy
       Spirit. Another evidence for us of the Spirit’s presence was his ministry of laying upon other believers a
       prayer-burden for us. My late wife exhibited such a noticeable peace in spite of her serious medical
       condition that she was asked repeatedly about that peace as if there were something wrong with it. We
       believed that her peace came from the Holy Spirit. 9

       Rather than limit the witness and leadership of the Spirit to the propositions of Scripture, they would contend that
subjective impressions are part of His ministry. In contrast, Lazar seemed to advocate relying solely upon the propositions
of Scripture to determine God’s will. As noted in the introduction of this article, he exhorts: “Study the promises of God.
That’s how you can know God’s will. If God has promised to do something, and that’s what you’re praying for, then you
can be fully persuaded that it’s His will to answer your prayer” (emphasis his). I responded by asking,

       1. Does this position mean that the prayer of faith is limited to those things that God has promised
       universally to give everyone so that there is no possibility for individualization for factoring in of
       circumstances?
       2. Does this position mean that every time elders are summoned to pray for healing and the healing does
       not occur in this life that we can fault them with faulty faith?

        Part of my concern was that Lazar was factoring out any subjective leadership of the Spirit as to when to pray for
healing. Another part was that he was canceling any need for the wisdom talked about in Jam 1:5-8, in relation to Jam
5:14-15, as to when one could pray the prayer of faith for healing. I consider both presumptions presumptuous. In my
opinion, a better recourse would be to say (1) that there are certain things that God expects us to “ask in faith without any
doubting” (Jam 1:15), based exclusively on the promises of Scripture. (2) There are other things that Gods expects us to
ask confidently, even when we cannot ask with 100% certainty, that He will answer in the manner and time we request.
(3) In some of the latter types of requests, God may on occasion give us 100% assurance through the subjective leadership
of the Spirit. James just might be talking about this type and level of assurance in Jam 5:15 when he refers to “the prayer
of faith.” Writing from this perspective, GES commentator Zane Hodges wisely comments:

7
  Daniel B. Wallace, M. James Sawyer, Richard E. Averbeck, Gerald Bray, J. I. Packer, Reg Grant, David Eckman, Jeff
Louie, Donald K. Smith, Who's Afraid of the Holy Spirit, Kindle Edition (Dallas: Biblical Studies Press, 2005), KL 350-
353). Some of the criticisms of GES by this book, however, are strawman arguments. For example, the authors criticize
GES as promoting a soteriological faith in a proposition rather than in a person. Not true. We believe in Jesus for eternal
life. Trust in the person and the proposition are interwoven.
8
  Ibid., KL 1076-1077.
9
  Ibid., KL 3531-3539.
Seven Ways God Answers Prayer                                                                                               Page 8

       Where God granted any, or all, of these men to pray a prayer of faith, that prayer would save the sick person
       from dying and the Lord would raise him up.
               There is no real problem with this text so long as we allow it to mean what it says—and neither more
       or less than it says. There is nothing here at all about a gift of healing possessed by any of the elders. Rather,
       these church leaders function simply as intercessors on behalf of the one who is sick. Neither does James
       say that recovery always occurs. It will occur where there is a prayer of faith, but the absence of such a
       prayer does not mean that the elders are spiritually deficient. It might be, in any given case, that the elders
       would not be at all sure whether recovery would be for the best. In such cases, they might well pray (as our
       Lord prayed in the Garden of Gethsemane), “Your will be done” (Matt 26:39-42). The more biblically based
       and perceptive the elders of a church are, the more readily they will be able to evaluate the specific situation
       in a spiritual way and to pray accordingly. 10 (Emphasis his.)

        Only one elder, not all, needs to be able to pray the prayer of faith for the answer to be absolutely assured.
Otherwise, the recovery should not be assumed necessarily to occur. Indeed, the elders may not be sure that recovery is
for the best. Their confidence in that case would be less than 100%. When they are not absolutely sure of God’s will,
they leave the matter to God’s will while making their request. Perceptive elders will evaluate the specific circumstances
with spiritual wisdom and through the leadership of the Spirit to discern which type of prayer is called for. Therefore, the
prayer of faith is not merely being 100% persuaded that God will grant the request but also being in tune with God’s
Spirit in deriving that degree of assurance.
                                                     Conclusion
      Three levels of faith seem to be involved in confidently asking God to answer our prayers. And the matter for
which we praying might, at times, determine the level of faith required.

       1. Somethings require absolute faith and are absolutely assured of being granted if the conditions are met.
       2. Somethings require positive expectation but are not absolutely assured of being granted even if the normal
          conditions are met.
       3. Sometimes matters in the latter category are absolutely assured of being granted when the Spirit gives absolute
          subjective assurance.

       If the promise that God will heal in response to the prayer of faith in Jam 5:15 is an absolute, then it seems to be
a reasonable deduction that this is a special occasion of faith when the Spirit grants 100% certainty. The third category
applies in that case. If, however, the promise that God will heal is merely a positive expectation, then the second category
applies. The approach adopted herein would allow for either possibility. Although my personal exegetical preference is
for the former in the case of Jam 5:15, the latter is certainly applicable to other situations and faith texts.
       Many times, probably even most the time, our requests will fall into category two. We pray confidently that God
will give us the desires of our heart as we do our best, through the leadership and power of His Spirit, to walk in His
word and pray in His will (Ps 37:4). Yet we know that our Heavenly Father may answer our childish prayers differently
than we anticipated. Still, as His children, we trust Him and cast our cares upon Him, knowing that He cares for us (1Pet
5:7). We do not assume that sister like Joni Eareckson Tada is confined to a wheelchair because she cannot find someone
who has enough faith to get her out. Rather, we rest assured that she will be well rewarded, eventually, for her persevering
faith despite her current plight.




10
   Zane C. Hodges, The Epistle of James: Proven Character Through Testing (Irving, TX: GES, 1994), 116. Lenski
likewise states: “All true prayer for earthly blessings is based on the condition ‘if the Lord wills’ ([Jam] 4:15)....That
every patient for whom elders prayed would promptly recover, and that none would die, is certainly not the meaning of
James....The elders are not prayer-healers such as we have today. Nor are they miracle-workers.” (James, 663-664.)
