                                   Static Versus Dynamic Life
                                             Revised 10/25/2009
    What does this warning of death in Rom 8:13 mean for the Christian: “If you live according to the flesh,
you must/will die”? Various alternatives have been suggested.

    1.   Die prematurely (Kendall, OSAS, 189; Constable)
    2.   Die temporally (Dillow, Reign, 365-368; Kendall, OSAS, 189; Constable; BKC; NIBC,).
    3.   Die misthologically (Sweigart, Pothole, 3.)1
    4.   Die hypothetically (Calvinists)
    5.   Die spiritually (Arminians)

     According to the Arminian, if a believer does not persevere, he will die spiritually. That is, he will lose
eternal life and go to hell. To be sure, this verse describes the potential death of born-again believers, referred
to as brethren in v. 12. Calvinists will frequently admit that the verse is dealing with genuine believers. Then
they will argue that it is only portraying the hypothetical possibility of such death. But this first class
conditional sentence is firmly rooted in reality. It cannot be shuffled to the outer stratosphere of mere
potentiality belonging to classes further removed from reality.
     After all, if this death were not a real possibility, the warning would be nonsensical. Those believers who
walk according to the flesh will die. Those believers who walk according to the Spirit will live. The possibility
of death is no more hypothetical than the possibility of life. The other Calvinistic counter sometimes offered is
that these brethren are merely professing believers. But the context shows otherwise. Moreover, one must have
spiritual life in order to be in danger of spiritual death. You cannot threaten a spiritually dead person with
spiritual death. Such a person is already dead. Therefore, it must be concluded that these are regenerate
brethren who are being warned of dying.
     Does this mean that retention of regeneration is at stake? According to both Arminians and Calvinists, the
answer is, “Yes.” Perseverance is necessary to reach heaven in both of these soteriological systems. If a
believer were not to persevere, then the believer would lose the eternal life imparted at regeneration. Eternal
life is a dynamic life-giving stream flowing from one’s union with Christ. If one is severed from Christ (Gal
5:4), one will whither and die and lose eternal life. For both the Calvinist and Arminian, soteriological security
is at stake.
     Since the Calvinistic interpretation merges into the Arminian outcome, our specific interest in this survey
is this Arminian explanation. The first three interpretations, in contrast, are non-soteriological and preferred by
FG interpreters. From the FG perspective, since life and death are dependent upon the way we live in Rom
8:13, life and death do not refer to soteriological truths. FG does not understand Paul as teaching soteriological
security based on works. Our soteriological possession of life is not conditioned on the way we live. It is static
in that there is no fluctuation in our possession of eternal life at the soteric level. However, our experience of
life and death is so conditioned on the way we live and is therefore open to dynamic variation. This distinction
between possession and experience, therefore, leads us to conclude that eternal life has both static and dynamic
dimensions. The result of sin is death, even for the believer. But by definition of what is meant by static
possession, the FG interpretation will limit this death to the dynamic experience of such life.
     Paul has set the stage for this conclusion earlier in the context where he notes that the believer may walk in
newness of life (Rom 6:4). But he also warns of the possibility of a death dependent upon moral obedience
(Rom 6:16). The outcome (telos) of unrighteousness in contrast is death (6:21). But in the same verse he
presents the positive parallel: obedience results in (eis) righteousness (6:16). With this potential positive
outcome in mind, Paul urges believers to “present your members as slaves to righteousness, resulting in (eis)
sanctification” (6:19). The causal connection is clear. Moral obedience results in righteousness, and
righteousness in turn results in sanctification. And the outcome (telos) of this practical sanctification is eternal
life (6:22).

                                                    Telolic Links:
               obedience      experiential righteousness practical sanctification eternal life
                             disobedience experiential unrighteousness death

                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
     The misthological nature of this telolic spectrum of eternal life is thus very apparent. Eternal life is the
reward for practical sanctification. Alternatively, telolic death is the outcome for unrighteous behavior. The
parallelism between telolic life and telolic death as dual possible outcomes for the believer strongly suggests a
misthological view of this telolic death. Telolic death is the absence of telolic life. Therefore, we do not fault
Arminians and Calvinists for finding an eschatological dimension to this death. The broad context suggests this
is indeed the case. But must this misthological death necessarily entail soteriological loss? Our readers are
certainly asking this question, and Paul apparently felt that his readers would also. So he responds to this
anticipated question in the very next verse with a contrast not only between life and death, but also between
soteriological and misthological bestowments. With life and death for the believer hanging in the contextual
balance, Paul reassures his Christian readers, “The wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God is eternal life
in Christ Jesus our Lord” (6:23).
     Death, whether soteriological or misthological, is a wage. Eternal life, in contrast, is first and foremost a
free gift. Since it is eternal, once it is received it cannot be lost. The dynamic qualitative force of this life must
not be stressed to the detriment of its static quantitative stability. The durative nature of this life must be
maintained at the static level. Otherwise, it would not be eternal life.
     However, Paul’s emphasis in Romans is not on the fundamental nature of this life at the static level. The
other three times Paul uses the full expression eternal life in Romans, he uses it misthologically to describe the
telolic nature of this life. 1 “He will reward eternal life to those who seek for glory and honor and immortality
by persevering in good work (Rom 2:7; TM). Eternal life is a reward for good work. 2 “Grace might reign
through righteousness resulting in (eis) eternal life (Rom 5:21; TM). This verse, which is the last verse of ch.
5, introduces the same causal link we see in ch. 6. Experiential righteousness results in eternal life (6:16-20).
3 And as we noted in 6:22, eternal life is the outcome or end result (telos) of practical sanctification. In these
three verses, eternal life is an object that is bestowed as a reward.
     But in Rom 6:23, Paul is no longer presenting eternal life as a misthological object. Rather, in clear
contrast with the concept of reward, he uses an adversative conjunction but (de) to affirm that eternal life is a
free gift. Before eternal life can be pursued as a reward, it must first be received as a free gift. From Pauline
theology in general, and the book of Romans in particular, we may clearly assert that a gift is not a reward
since the latter is based on works and the former is not. (See What is Work.) So how is it that eternal life is
both a gift and a reward when a gift is not a reward?
     The answer is simple. There are dual dimensions to eternal life. The various dynamic experiences of this
life is conditioned on works. But the basic static possession of eternal life is not conditioned on works.
Therefore, it clearly follows from the definition of gift that the possession of eternal life cannot be conditioned
on how we live. Consequently, when Paul warns that those believers who live according to the flesh will die,
he cannot be talking about losing possession of eternal life. The imputation of righteousness as a free gift
(5:17) results in justification of life (5:18), which is the impartation of the eternal life as a free gift.

                                                 Soteric Link:
                            imputational righteousness justification                 eternal life

     Imputational justification thus makes the impartational regeneration possible. (See ordo salutis in The
Outer Darkness.) Since soteriological justification is by faith apart from works, the soteriological possession of
eternal life must likewise be by faith apart from works. The two go hand in hand. Likewise, the possibility that
a believer may be righteous positionally but not experientially corresponds to our conclusion that a believer
may have eternal life statically but fail to experience it dynamically. As Paul said elsewhere, believers who live
according to the flesh are dead even while they live (1Tim 5:6). They are the living dead. Although they have
both physical and spiritual life, their experience is one of death. Eternal life for them is a static possession
rather than dynamic experience. They are dead in terms of their spiritual experience and in terms of their
fellowship with God. Death is separation from God who is life. But God gives life at various levels. Such
believers are separated from God’s fellowship and empowerment. They are not experiencing a life of
fellowship with God or the dynamic power of God.
     Tragically, such believers will also experience misthological death. Death is the absence of life.
Misthological death would therefore be the absence of misthological life. Just as life can be experienced at
multiple levels, so can death. Those believers who have eternal life at the soteriological level may fail to

                               For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                  Misthologist@misthology.org
experience eternal life temporally at the filial level and eternally at the misthological level. They will not reign
in life (Rom 5:17). They will not share this reign in life. Rather, their temporal and misthological experience
will be one of death. They will be separated from this victorious experience with God as a result of their sin.
They will have an impoverished experience both now and in the future.2
     The wages of sin is death—both temporal and misthological in the case of the believer. In contrast to the
wages of sin, the gift and reward of God is eternal life. At the static level, eternal life is a gift. At the dynamic
level, it is a reward (Rom 6:22-23). Our daily experience of salvation from the power of sin can fluctuate.
Relationship is permanent; fellowship is not. Present dynamic salvation should be a growing experience (1Pet
2:2). But it may wither instead. But even if it withers to the point of experiential death, the static possession of
the imputation of justification and the impartation of regeneration is retained. Judicial victory over the penalty
of sin has been permanently granted apart from works. The fact that Peter describes being born again as being
accomplished with indestructible seed in 1Pet 1:23 would suggest that the life imparted is indestructible.3
     The NT talks about the possibility of believers losing their life, reward, and crown in the future. These
ennoblements are forfeitable and thus may be lost in terms of the believer failing to achieve the intended
consummation. Eternal life may indeed be lost—in terms of dynamic experience and potential. For example,
believers may lose the crown of life and lose access to the tree of life in the future, and they may fail to
experience eternal life in the form of abundant life in the present. This fullness of the dynamic potential of
eternal life is indeed forfeitable.

                                                     Salvation
                  past                               present                                     future
         judicial penalty of sin                  power of sin                         misthological penalty of sin
      static permanent relational            dynamic fluctuating filial                        conditional

         We may lose eternal life as a reward, but we cannot forfeit the gift of eternal life. This would seem to
be a rather straightforward deduction from the nature of the terms involved. Soteriological security is not at
risk. Nevertheless, the question one still hears posed is, “Where is the proof from the context that this death is
not spiritual death?” We offer this brief interaction with the context to provide that proof.

☺                          Quotation                                             Summation
         You are not in the flesh but in the            You are not in the flesh since you have the Spirit.
          Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God
          dwells in you. (8:9a)
         But if anyone does not have the Spirit         You belong to Christ since you have the Spirit.
          of Christ, he does not belong to Him.
          (8:9b)
         And if Christ is in you, though the            Your spirit is alive since you have the Spirit. Note, Paul
          body is dead because of sin, yet the           was trapped in a body of death in 7:24. Yet, here he
          spirit is alive because of righteousness.      affirms that his spirit was still alive nonetheless.
          (8:10)
         But if the Spirit of Him who raised            Note the change from present to future tense. This life is to
          Jesus from the dead dwells in you, He          be given in the future to your bodies. Why? Because it is a
          who raised Christ Jesus from the dead          logical future. It is logically dependent upon your
          will also give life to your mortal bodies      cooperation in meeting your obligation. But it may be
          through His Spirit who indwells you.           eschatologically future as well since these sons are waiting
          (8:11)                                         for the glorified redemption of their bodies.
         So then, brethren, we are under                Statement of moral obligation.
          obligation, not to the flesh, to live
          according to the flesh. (8:12)
         For if you are living according to the         Future death because logically dependent upon your
          flesh, you must die. (8:13a)                   cooperation.
         But if by the Spirit you are putting to        This future life matches the future life of 8:11 and is

                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
          death the deeds of the body, you will          dependent upon our meeting our moral obligation. It is to
          live. (8:13b)                                  have life in your body now and live as a son of God in the
                                                         future.
         For all who are being led by the Spirit        You are a son of God if you are being led by the Spirit.
          of God, these are sons of God. (8:14)          Thus, your being a son of God is conditioned on your
                                                         following the Spirit’s leadership in meeting your moral
                                                         obligation. Only those who meet their obligation will live
                                                         as sons of God.
     ?  For you have not received a spirit of            Adopted sons cry, “Father.” But sons have just been
        slavery leading to fear again, but you           defined as those who meet their moral obligation to their
        have received a spirit of adoption as            Father. They may not be the only ones who can cry,
        sons by which we cry out, “Abba!                 “Father.” The children of God may also.
        Father!” (8:15)
       The Spirit Himself bears witness with        Children of God as opposed to sons of God.
        our spirit that we are children of God.
        (8:16)
       If children, heirs also, heirs of God.       Children then unconditionally heirs.
        (8:17a)
     If indeed we suffer with Him in order          Conditional co-glorification. Only those who meet their
        that we may also be glorified with           moral obligation will live as co-heirs.
        Him. (8:17b)
        For the anxious longing of the creation Sons of God are co-glorified in the revelation (8:17b-18)
        waits eagerly for the revealing of the
        sons of God. (8:19)
        The creation itself also will be set free    Children of God are glorified.
        from its slavery to corruption into the
        freedom of the glory of the children of
        God. (8:21)
        And not only this, but also we               Adopted sons await their redeemed glorified bodies.
        ourselves, having the first fruits of the
        Spirit, even we ourselves groan within
        ourselves, waiting eagerly for our
        adoption as sons, the redemption of our
        body. (8:23)
☺ = Unconditional for the believer             = conditional for the believer

          From the chart we see that meeting our moral obligation by putting to death the deeds of our body
results in life for our body so that we may live as a son of God in the present and be co-glorified as sons of
God in the future. In the broader context, the death of ch. 8 is illustrated in ch 7. Sin killed Paul (Rom 7:11).
How? Did it send him to hell? No. Paul describes this death as failing to experience the life-giving power of
the Spirit in his body. Therefore, death is dynamic rather than static. Even in this state of death, his inner man
is nevertheless pictured as alive (7:22). He has static life even during his dynamic experience of death. Having
life in the inner man corresponds to having life given to his spirit (8:10). This static impartation of life to his
spirit had failed to result in a dynamic transformation in his experience in ch. 7. He explicitly identified his
death as occurring in his body (7:24). His inner man was alive within his body of death. The implication of ch.
7 is that his spirit was alive despite his failure to meet his moral obligation to put to death the deeds of his
body.
          Paul makes this explicit in ch. 8 when he affirms that the spirit is alive even though the body is dead
(8:10). Let us not gloss over the affirmation that Paul is making in this verse: “If Christ is in you, though the
body is dead because of sin, yet the spirit is alive because of righteousness.” For the body to be dead means
that it is not experiencing the life-giving power of the Spirit. Paul has just been describing what it means for
the body to be dead in ch. 7. Paul is claiming that even if you as a believer are having a ch. 7 experience, your
spirit is nevertheless alive because of righteousness. Experiential righteousness? Not hardly. His experience as
                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
a believer in ch. 7 was one of death. Yet Paul affirms that the believer’s spirit is alive. Why? Because of
righteousness. This must be imputational righteousness. It is not the telolic causal link of righteousness
resulting in eternal life eschatologically. Rather, it must be the soteric causal connection between justification
and life that he alluded to as justification of life in 5:18. The impartation of the eternal life is a free gift. This
imputational righteousness makes impartational regeneration possible. More than that, imputation makes
regeneration retainable.
         Paul is assuring us that even if our body is dead because of sin (i.e., even if we are dynamically dead
and immoral in our practice as described in ch. 7) nevertheless our spirit is alive because of righteousness.
This is the static possession of life due to the imputation of righteousness to us as a gift. Romans 8:10 is 7:7-21
in a nutshell. Even though your body is experientially dead because of sin, your spirit (i.e., your inner man is
soteriologically alive). As Lopez notes, the if of verse 10 is best translated as since (Romans, 166). After all,
there is no question as to whether or not Christ is in someone who is spiritually alive. Paul’s affirmation may
thus be stated without any question that would be implied by if. Since Christ is in you, you are spiritually
alive even though you are experientially dead.
         But rather than leave us in this tragic state of defeat, Paul moves to verse 11 with an adversative
conjunction but (de) to say that this is not the end of the story. The rest of the story is that Christ is ready,
willing, and able to make a dynamic transfusion of life from the static storehouse in our spirits to our mortal
bodies (8:11) if we will meet the necessary moral obligation (8:13). Merely having Christ in you will result in
a live spirit but dead body. If you want to experience life in your body, you must do more than simply have
Christ in you. You must allow Him to perform a dynamic ongoing transfusion. Therefore, what is at stake if
you fail to meet your moral obligation for such a transfusion is not the death of your spirit but the continued
experience of death in your body.

                       Ch. 7                                                                Ch. 8
     Immortal                            mortal                        Immortal                     mortal
       spirit                            body                            spirit                     body




     static                                                            static transfusion
                                                                                one way
                                                                                          dynamic




         To restate the facts, even if you are bodily dead and not meeting your moral obligation necessary
to experience life in your mortal body, your spirit is nevertheless alive since Christ is in you (8:10). Paul
also indicates in his conclusion of this section that nothing can separate him from Christ (8:31-39). Moral
failure will result in mortal calamity. But your spirit is not subject to such death since your regenerate spirit has
been made immortal. The context in general and 8:10 in particular render the soteriological interpretation of
8:13 null and void. Incidentally, the word used by Peter to say that we have been born again of imperishable
(aphthartos) seed is the same word used by Paul when he says that God is immortal (1Tim 1:17). The seed of
life, which God has placed in us, is immortal. We will never perish because our spirit has become immortal by
virtue of our new birth. Christ has taken up static residency within our spirits in that He does not come and go.
This spiritual union is permanent. However, the experience of this reality is dynamic if we submit to the

                               For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                  Misthologist@misthology.org
transfusion of life to our bodies. But even if we do not, the flow of the transfusion is in one direction. The
spirit can impart life to the body, but the body cannot impart death to the spirit.




          So what are we to make of the Calminian lamp in which Arminians and Calvinists join forces to assert
that if the believer becomes unplugged from Christ by failing to persevere in faith the believer loses eternal
life? We respond that eternal life is both dynamic and static. Even if the dynamic expression of that life is put
out so that the static potential is hidden from view by the darkness, the static power is still there, residing just
as powerful and just as available as ever in our spirit. The body of the lamp can become unplugged from the
outlet, but this does not mean that the outlet becomes unplugged from itself. We need to plug into the power
available in our spirit through the Spirit who indwells our spirit. But even if we fail to plug into that power
source, the Spirit still indwells our spirit. The light-giving power is still there even though the lamp is not
burning. We are not only the lamp, we are the outlet also. The lamp represents our body. The outlet represents
our spirit. Even if we do not have life dynamically, we still have it statically. Our spirit cannot be unplugged
from Christ since His Spirit permanently resides in our spirit. It is only our bodies that may fail to plug into
Christ. But this failure is nothing more than failing to plug into the life that is available in our spirit and which
permanently resides there in our spirit.
          Granted, the response will be made that Paul says in Rom 8:13 that you will die. Rather than saying
that your body will die, he speaks holistically of the entire person as dying. Does this mean that the believer’s
spirit will die also? No. But it does mean that the person himself will experience death, not just his body.
When we experience temporal death, it is as a person, not just as a body. In ch. 7, Paul describes his temporal
experience of death as a person. Despite the fact that his inner man is alive, his experience as a person is death.
          The response will still be made that Paul says in Rom 8:13 that you will die. If you are presently living
according to the flesh, you are dead. Your bodily experience is already one of death. But rather than say that
you are dead, Paul says that you will die in the future. So Paul must mean that your spirit will die. Otherwise,
he would have said, “You are dead.”
          We counter by noting two matters from the context. One, the statement you will die may just be
implementing a logical future to denote the conditional nature of this death. This is certainly the case in 8:11
and 8:13b. However, we find no reason to limit this death to the temporal dimension. We agree with
Arminians and Calvinists who find an eschatological dimension to this death since it is juxtaposed in the
immediate context with eschatological life as a son of God. Moreover, the telolic nature of this death for the
believer has already been established from the broader context. But this does not require a soteriological
understanding of this death.
          Misthological death for the believer will mean that that believer will not be co-glorified as a son of
God. Failure to experience this qualitative degree of life may be considered a form of death. Failure to attain to
misthological life may be regarded as misthological death. Death may be defined as the absence of life. In this
case, it is the absence of misthological life. So the fact that it is eschatological does not mean that it cannot be
misthological. Nor does its futuristic nature conflict with its personal nature. If we are thrown into the outer
darkness, it is as a person. Our body is not thrown into the outer darkness while our spirit is allowed to roam

                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
freely. The consequences are very real. The believer cast into the outer darkness will weep and gnash his teeth
in response to his misthological death. It will not be merely his body weeping and gnashing its teeth. It will be
the believer himself weeping and gnashing his teeth. Since there will no longer be any disharmony between the
believer’s spirit and body, this expression of sorrow must be profound indeed. It will not be a case of rejoicing
in spirit while sorrowing in body. Death will hurt—even if it is misthological death.

1
  John M. Sweigart, Romans 6:23: A Pothole in the Romans Road.
2
  Believers cannot be separated from God in terms of their relationship as a child of God. Their fundamental
relationship with God cannot die. But their fellowship with Him both now and in the future can die. Those believers
who are cast into the outer darkness are separated from God in terms of fellowship. They do not share the joy of
ruling with Him in heaven. To be sure, they will share the joy of being with Him in heaven, but this joy will
certainly be impoverished compared to the life of those who rule as lords with Him who is Lord of lords.
3
  Paul links becoming a son with receiving the Spirit in Gal 4:6. Sonship in this dimension would suggest sonship by
birth. God imparts His life, eternal life, to us via this new birth. Just as our parents imparted their genetic code to us
in giving us life, so God has imparted His type of life to us as well. Our sonship, as an expression of the life that
God has imparted to us, is eternal. This impartation is in terms of quality and quantity. It is eternal in quantity and
moral in quality. Paul describes us as sons of light (1Thess 5:5). Light certainly has moral connotations. However,
the context shows that sons of light are in danger of living like creatures of the night, but ontological sons of light
will not suffer the same wrath as those who are ontologically creatures of night (1Thess 5:6-10). Again, such
sonship does not guarantee daily performance, nor is such sonship conditioned on daily performance. Quite to the
contrary, such sons are promised that they will not suffer wrath even if their daily performance is of the night. Moral
imperfection does not nullify static retention of regeneration.




                                For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                 Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                   Misthologist@misthology.org
