                                Work is Determined by Source
                                                Revised 10/25/2009
Harlan D. Betz in Setting the Stage for Eternity (p. 180) fittingly affirms that what we do must be energized by
Christ if we are to be rewarded at the bema as an overcomer. It is, therefore, very important that we evaluate
the source of our actions.1 It is possible to serve Christ in the strength of the flesh and fail to have any works
that result in reward at the bema. The Lord says that anything we do apart from Him is nothing (Jn 15:5). The
reason we need to abide in Christ is so that our life’s actions will not go up in smoke at the bema (Jn 15:6).
Accordingly, those believers who build upon the foundation of Christ in the
strength of the flesh will find that their works are burned up at the bema (1Cor
3:15). The primary reason we believers need to abide in Christ is so that we may
not shrink away from Him in burning shame at the bema (1Jn 2:28).

Does this mean that everything we do is a work—either of the flesh or the Spirit?
No. As we have shown elsewhere, not everything we do is a work. So not
everything we do is a work of either the flesh or the Spirit. Sleep is something we do, but it is not necessarily a
work. Sleeping is not normally an issue of merit or demerit, although on occasion it may be. Anything we do is
potentially rewardable by God, but this does not mean that it will necessarily be rewarded.

                            Although sleeping is something we passively do, it may be similarly deduced that
                            not everything we actively do is a work either. It is not a work if it is something we
                            do that does not involve merit or demerit, entitling us to a correspondingly positive
                            or negative reward. For this example, suppose I order mustard on my burger. Is this
                            a work of the flesh or a work of the Spirit? Neither. I will not be rewarded or
                            punished at the bema for having ordered mustard. Neither my old nature nor new
                            nature caused me to make that decision. Our choices are not made by our nature
                            but by us. Nor did my decision find its source in my fleshly nature or regenerate
nature. I simply made that decision of my own free volition.2

Now, if a lost person orders mustard, must that decision to
order mustard be regarded as coming from his fleshly sin
nature? No. It is not a sin to order mustard. But if the lost can
do something that is morally neutral, and which is thus not
considered a work, can he also do something that is morally
good and that is consequently considered a positive work?
Evidently so, relatively speaking, Cornelius is such an
example. The lost will be rewarded for the good works they
do in response to the Spirit’s enabling.3 For this reason, the
Bible urges them to seek God and to believe that God will
reward their efforts.

A work is something we do which is rewardable (Rom 4:4).
But not everything we do is a work since not everything we
do is rewardable. A logical corollary that necessarily follows is that not everything we do finds its source in the
flesh or in the Spirit. Any deed of the flesh or fruit of the Spirit is rewardable and hence a work. As such, what
we do may either be negative (fleshly), neutral (amoral), or positive (spiritual).4
        1. Not everything we do is rewardable work.
        2. Everything we do which morally has its source in the flesh or in the Spirit is a rewardable work.
        3. Therefore, not everything we do morally has its source in the flesh or in the Spirit.5
Saving faith is the singular exception in that it is misthologically neutral despite the fact that it is done through
the Spirit and in obedience to God’s expressed moral will. As explained in What is Work, saving faith is not a
work since it results in a gift rather than a reward and is the instrumental means through which the gift is
received rather than the basis for the gift.

                              For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                               Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                 Misthologist@misthology.org
1
  Rewards are based on our work. Rewards are determined by the origination, action, motivation, intention, and persuasion, as well as the
resources and results of the things we do. This article will only focus on the origination (i.e., source of our works). But briefly, in relation to these
other considerations, consider two lost people who have the same motive (to provide for their family). One steals while the other works in order
to do so. They will not be treated the same in hell. They had the same motive and same power source (their flesh), but their actions were different
and will be rewarded differently in hell.
2
  Everything we do as an expression of our fallen nature is negatively rewardable, and everything we do as an expression of our regenerate nature
is positively rewardable. In either case, we are the ones who do it and who will be rewarded accordingly. When Adam sinned in the garden, it was
not from a flawed nature. When Adam obeyed in the garden, it was not from a regenerate nature. When Cornelius obeyed, it was not from his
fallen nature. When we disobey or obey God, we do so as a person, not as a nature. Geisler’s Chosen But Free would be a resource for discussing
free agency.
3
  Now, to be sure, what obedience the lost give in response to the Spirit should not be called the fruit of the Spirit since they have no regenerate
nature from which that action can arise. The fruit of the Spirit can only be derived from one who has the Spirit’s nature. After all, you only get the
fruit of an apple tree from a tree that has the nature of an apple tree. As to the source illustration, what we do is but a subset of what we could do
within the range of desires in our sources and is thus pictured as such.
4
  Amoral is being used in the sense of being within the permissive boundaries of God’s moral will. See Duality of Permissive Will in The Outer
Darkness. The Spirit allows us a range of freedom as self-determining agents so that being self-directed is not necessarily contradictory to being
Spirit-led but rather a non-misthological subset of God’s permissive moral will. Also see Doxological Versus Misthological Amorality.
5
  This statement is of course meant to move beyond the general affirmation in which it might be said that everything we do is through the Spirit’s
enabling (Acts 17:28). It might also be objected that everything we do doxologically could be regarded as finding its source in the Spirit and
would thus be misthological. We disagree. The Spirit enables everything that we as human beings do. The lost as well as the saved can enjoy a
beautiful sunset and mustard to the glory of God. This is why we picture work as being a subset of what is done in the flesh or Spirit. The lost are
in the flesh, but this does not mean that everything they do is morally regarded as coming from the flesh. The saved are in the Spirit, but this does
not mean that everything they do is morally regarded as coming from the Spirit. Many things we do are considered amoral. See Doxological
Versus Misthological Amorality.




                                        For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                         Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                           Misthologist@misthology.org
