                                                           Work is Something We Do
                                                        Revised 10/25/2009
It has been asserted by some that a work is anything/everything we do.1 From this premise, it is reasoned by those of this mindset
that faith must always be a work in some sense of the word. Those maintaining this position may even assert that the gift of eternal
life is a reward and thus use the oxymoron reward-gift to describe the gift that is given to us when we respond in saving faith.


                                                                                                                                                    wor k
     1. Work is anything we do (e.g., Jn 6:28-29).
     2. Faith is something we do (e.g., Acts 16:30).
     3. Therefore, faith is a work (e.g., Jn 6:28-29).

Following this logic, it is asserted that faith is a subset of work, at least in the broadest sense of the
word work. In other words, when the word work is expanded to its broadest semantic range to                                                        a it h




                                                                                                                                            f
encompass anything and everything we do, those following this rational insist that faith is a work.
When asked how it is that faith is not a work in other passages, advocates of this outlook respond that
such faith is a nonmeritorious work or that it is supernaturally produced and therefore not something
we do. But it would still be necessary to explain why a supernaturally produced faith is considered a
meritorious work resulting in reward in some passages but not others.2 A better proposal exists.

Now certainly we will agree with the above syllogism in that both works and faith are something we do. But this does not mean that
everything we do is work. The major premise of the above syllogism is absurd. A more reasonable syllogism would be:

     1. Work is something we do.
     2. Faith is something we do.
     3. Therefore, faith is sometimes a work.

Not everything we do is work. Not everything we do is faith. This realistically leaves us with two possibilities. Faith and works are
both something we do, but (A) they are never one-and-the-same or (B) sometimes faith may be considered a work.


                                            work                                                                              wor k
                             Option A (distinction)                                                                    Option B (overlap)




                    ai t h                                                                                        ai t h
            f




                                                                                                          f




We have chosen Option B because faith is a passive result that we are expected to actively produce which may result in a reward.3
A passive work is something produced by active work. Such passive works are pictured as being rewardable (1Cor 3:13-15). Since
faith is sometimes rewarded, it is sometimes regarded as a work. Everything we do which results in a reward is a work. Nothing we
do which results in a gift is a work. From the perspective of outcome in terms of gift versus reward, everything we do that
results in a reward is a work. Hence, a work is anything we do that results in a reward. Therefore, we choose semantic overlap
rather than thoroughgoing distinction as being the best picture of the relationship between faith and works.
1
  The NIV translation of Rom 2:6 is used by those who take the subset approach since the NIV takes the more generic and comprehensive rendering of ergon as something
which we do: “God will give to each person according to what he has done (ergon).” Consequently, subset advocates read the verse as if it said that God will reward us
according to all that we have done. In doing so, they read their theology into the text. The text does not say all, and the context itself suggests that the reward is limited to
things which we do which are good and bad (Rom 2:7-10). Amoral actions would therefore not be considered works. Ergon is better rendered as work to denote the subset
of what we have done which have misthological consequences. This is not to say that we would object to the standard rendering of done for prasso in 2Cor 5:10. But let it
be noted that the verse itself supplies the limitation when it says that each one will “be recompensed for his deeds in the body, according to what he has done, whether good
or bad.” The clarification whether good or bad is obscured by the NIV in Rom 2:6. Not everything we do is rewardable, only those things which are good or bad. Things we
do amorally do not count misthologically. Similar comments might be made for texts such as Col 3:35 which says, “He who does wrong will receive the consequences of
the wrong which he has done (adikeo).” God will reward good with good and bad with bad. This does not mean that everything we do is good or bad. See Amoral Faith and
Doxological Versus Misthological Amorality.
2
  For our response to source considerations, see Work is Determined by Source.
3
  The semantic overlap between faith and works as something we do realistically nullifies Option A since faith may sometimes be rewarded. See What is Work.


                                                     For further explanation, see my upcoming book The Outer Darkness.
                                                                      Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2008
                                                                        Misthologist@misthology.org
