                                           Work of God
                                               Revised 10/25/2009

Calvinistic Work
    Those who take a Calvinistic view of faith are quick to use Jn 6:29 to advance their soteriology by
claiming that saving faith is a work of God—in the literal sense of being produced by God. This position is
then fortified with a Calvinistic interpretation of Eph 2:8-9 in which faith is viewed as a gift of God. It is a
work of God produced within man and irresistibly given to man.

Dualistic Work
    But, strangely, advocates of this rationale do not necessarily stop with affirming that faith is a work of God
in Jn 6:29. They also appeal to the popular interpretation that sees work in this passage as a work of man—in
the generic sense of being something we do. After all, the people being addressed have just been told by Jesus
to work for eternal life (Jn 6:27). And they respond by asking, “What shall we do, that we may work the works
of God?” (Jn 6:28) And Jesus responds, “This is the work of God, that you believe in Him whom He has sent”
(Jn 6:29). Obviously, the work of God is something they are expected to do. So it is also in some sense a work
of man.

Alternate Proposal
     We will challenge both the popular opinion and the Calvinistic interpretation of Jn 6:29 in that we do not
find it necessary to see saving faith as literally being considered a work of either God or man in this context.
And we certainly do not find it necessary to understand work of God to mean produced by God. Granted, many
FG writers would readily succumb to the popular opinion that saving faith is a work in some sense of the word.
Yet they would reject the conclusion that it is a work in the Calvinistic sense. So even if a Calvinist were
successful in circumventing our argument that faith is not a work in this passage, he would still have to
contend with the various other manners in which saving faith is considered a non-Calvinistic work by non-
Calvinists other than ourselves.
     The argument being employed herein, however, heads the Calvinistic argument off at the pass by
contending that saving faith is not a work in the literal sense of the word. But this is the result rather than
reason for our argument. The primary motivating factor for not considering saving faith a work is due to the
Pauline contrast between such faith and work. In Paul‟s mind, and evidently in the minds of his Greek
speaking readers, the two were not to be equated. Thus, we reject considering soteriological faith a work
because Paul rejects such association. Our second reason for not considering such faith to be a work is because
Jesus‟ statement does require such an association. Jesus is making a play on words with the word work in
Jn 6:29 to refer to what is required rather than produced by God. The work of God contextually is to be
equated with the moral rather than irresistible will of God (Jn 6:38-40). Additionally, the word work is being
used ironically in contrast to the work they are performing. Moreover, it is being used metaphorically to refer
to faith as the requirement.

Popular FG Perspective
     Nevertheless, in refuting the popular misconception in which everything we do (including coming to
saving faith) is considered a work, we will need to respond to some FG advocates whose statements are
appealed to by Calvinists in defense of equating faith with works. Art Farstad, for example, writing from a FG
perspective, has made the claim: “Anything that the believer does to the glory of God is a good work.” But by
this definition, which is derived from 1Cor 10:31, if God is glorified by our coming to faith, would not even
saving faith be considered a good work? Indeed, in this same article, Farstad states his belief that soteric faith
is the only work we are required to do in order to avail ourselves of the greatest good work which is Christ‟s
atonement (Jn 6:29). But if believing in Christ is good, and it is, and if believing in Christ is a work, as Farstad
maintains, then believing in Christ is a good work. Farstad correctly affirms that we will be rewarded for our
good works. But this poses a problem with his statement about faith being a work, and some would twist this
to mean that we are rewarded for saving faith. A twisted syllogism of his argument might be expressed as:
                                                                                                                   2


                                                    Farstad‟s Far Side®
                                               1. God rewards all our works.
                                               2. Saving faith is a work.
                                               3. God rewards saving faith.

     Following this line of reasoning would certainly lead one to conclude that the eternal life given in response
to saving faith is not a gift but a reward. After all, a gift is not a reward (see What is Work). But the Bible
explicitly says that eternal life is given as a gift in regeneration. Therefore, the gift of eternal life cannot be a
reward. In calling saving faith a work, Farstad leaves a number of paradoxical questions unanswered: “Why
does God not reward us for this work of saving faith?” Does Farstad intend for our work to be understood as a
work in the same sense as Christ‟s greatest work? Why does Farstad set our “work” in Jn 6:29 off with
quotation marks? Is this to indicate to the reader that he does not really consider faith to be a work in the same
sense as Christ‟s work? If so, in what sense is it a “work”? Is our faith a good work because it is in Christ‟s
good work? If so, is saving faith our greatest good work because it is in Christ‟s greatest good work? But if our
saving faith takes its character as well as its value from its object, then it is just as much a good work as was
Christ‟s greatest work. We are therefore on firm ground for questioning Farstad‟s definition and confusing, if
not contradictory, statements. We have demonstrated the fallacy of his definition of good work regarding 1Cor
10:31 elsewhere,1 now we will do the same for his assumption that faith is a work in Jn 6:29.

Required by God
     Although Calvinists, contrary to Calvin, interpret work of God as a genitive of source to mean work
produced by God, we agree with Calvin and interpret it to mean required by God. BDAG defines work (ergon,
1b) in Jn 6:28-29 as the deeds that God desires. The work of God is the work He wants us to do. Thayer
likewise regards work in this passage as the works required and approved by God. BGAG and Thayer also
jointly cite Jer 48:10 from the LXX as a case in point to show that it is required work: “Cursed is the one who
does the work of the Lord carelessly” (TM).
     BKC concurs that faith is required from us in this evangelistic invitation in Jn 6:29. This certainly fits the
context better. Jesus is not promising them that God will produce faith in them; rather, the Lord is telling them
that God requires faith from them. BDAG and Thayer also cite Rev 2:26 as being another case in point from
Johannine literature, where we are exhorted to keep the deeds of Christ until the end. It is an exhortation for
our perseverance in faith, not a promise of Christ‟s production of faith. Christ does not promise to produce
faith in believers until the end. Instead, He requires misthological faith from them until the end if they are to
receive the promised reward. Likewise, soteriological faith is required from us if we are to receive the gift of
eternal life.
     One can easily find other such examples in the GJ where the work of God refers to doing the will of God.
When Jesus says, “We must work the works of Him who sent Me,” He does not mean that we are to sit by
passively while God does the work for us or through us (Jn 9:4). Rather, it is to be taken in the same sense as
when He says, “My food is to do the will of Him who sent Me, and to accomplish His work” (Jn 4:34). We do
His will by doing His work. The work of God is the will of God. It is what we are supposed to do. It is the work
that He has given us to do (cp. Jn 5:36; 17:4), not the work which He produces for us. But perhaps the most
emphatic example comes from the context itself:
       27
         Do not work for the food which perishes, but for the food which endures to eternal life…”
       28
         They said therefore to Him, “What shall we do, that we may work the works of God?” 29Jesus
       answered and said to them, “This is the work of God, that you believe in Him whom He has
       sent.”…38For I have come down from heaven, not to do My own will, but the will of Him who
       sent Me. 39And this is the will of Him who sent Me, that of all that He has given Me I lose
       nothing, but raise it up on the last day. 40For this is the will of my Father, that everyone who
       beholds the Son and believes in Him, may have eternal life; and I Myself will raise him up on the
       last day.” (John 6:27-40)



                           For further explanation, see my upcoming books The Outer Darkness and Believe.
                                                  Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                      Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                                  3


     In the context of Jn 6:29, the work of God is that we do the will of the Father by believing in the Son (Jn
6:38-40).2 It is not a genitive of production but a genitive of possession. It is God‟s work, desire, will that we
believe.3 Saving faith is what He requires from us, not what He gives to us. He requires it from us because we
are the ones responsible for producing it!4

Seek for God
    Additionally, when the shift in how the word work is being used contextually is noted, it becomes apparent
that Jesus is using irony to metaphorically shift the synonymity. We will first quote the passage with expanded
explanation and then focus on the shift.
        26
           Jesus answered them and said, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you seek Me, not because you
        saw signs, but because you ate of the loaves, and were filled. 27 Do not work [= metaphor for
        seek] for the food which perishes, but for the food which endures to eternal life, which the
        Son of Man shall give to you, for on Him the Father, even God, has set His seal.” 28 They
        said therefore to Him, “What shall we do, that we may work the works of God? [They
        misconstrue the metaphor for work, and think that Jesus is actually telling them to
        meritoriously work for eternal life since they fail to distinguish the precondition from the
        condition.]” 29 Jesus answered and said to them, “This is the work of God, that you believe
        in Him whom He has sent.” [Jesus shifts the metaphor for work from seek to believe to refute
        their notion that works are the response God wants. What God actually requires is faith, not
        work.]

     Jesus is making a play on words with the word work in Jn 6:29 to expose their works-oriented mentality so
that He may refute it with singularity and irony. He uses singular work as opposed to their plural works. He
metaphorically defines this work as something that would not normally be considered a work—faith. This is
like saying, “The work God actually requires is that you not work but believe.” For those who claim that faith
in v. 29 is a work is like saying non-work is work. The semantic potentiality in which the word work could be
used to simply refer to something you do or to something God requires provides Jesus with the opportunity to
make a play on words that allows Him to speak ironically and metaphorically. He is not using the word work
normally (except in terms of potential semantic possibilities); rather, He is speaking metaphorically in order to
refute them ironically.

    1. The work of God is the will of God.
    2. The will of God is that you believe rather than work.
    3. Therefore, the work of God is that you believe rather than work.

    In short, the will of God is that you not work. To be sure, work in terms of seeking is the precondition to
be able to meet the condition that you believe rather than work. Saving faith is the result of work rather than a
work itself. Saving faith is the result of seeking rather than seeking itself. Saving faith is resting upon what one
has found. It is to move from being a seeker to a finder, that is, to a believer. Since seeking is the actual work
we are to perform in this passage, faith is not actually a work. The substitution will not work. You cannot
substitute seek for work in vv. 28-29, only in v. 26.
        26
           Jesus answered them and said, “Truly, truly, I say to you, you seek Me, not because you
        saw signs, but because you ate of the loaves, and were filled. 27 Do not work [= seek] for the
        food which perishes, but for the food which endures to eternal life, which the Son of Man
        shall give to you, for on Him the Father, even God, has set His seal.” 28 They said therefore
        to Him, “What shall we do, that we may work [= meritoriously do] the works of God? [= the
        will of God]” 29 Jesus answered and said to them, “This is the work of God [= the will of
        God], that you believe [= nonmeritoriously do] in Him whom He has sent.”



                           For further explanation, see my upcoming books The Outer Darkness and Believe.
                                                  Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                      Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                                 4


    The transitional nature of work in the context is apparent. It starts out as metaphorically referring to seek
and ends up as metaphorically referring to believe. It is metaphorically transitional in moving from a
meritorious response to a nonmeritorious response.

    1.   Work = seek = meritorious precondition (cp. Heb 11:6).
    2.   Work = do = meritorious performance as condition for eternal life.
    3.   Works of God = will of God = meritorious things as conditions for eternal life.
    4.   Work of God = will of God = believe work.

     Jesus begins by exhorting them to stop spending all their energy trying to get their bellies full and instead
spend their energy doing the work necessary to come to saving faith, to work for eternal life. Their ears perk up
at the thought of working for eternal life. This fits their work-oriented outlook. So they respond by asking what
kind of works they have to do. Jesus throws their expectations into reverse by metaphorically giving a single
work—faith. Its metaphorical nature is seen in the definition itself, in the contextual transition, in the broader
context which uses many metaphors for faith, and in the general understanding at that time which accepted as a
given that such faith was not a work. But some will respond, “But Jesus says that faith is a work so it must be a
work!”
     Yes, Jesus says that faith is a work in this passage. He also says that He is a vine and that we are branches
in ch. 15. Does this mean that we are to ignore the context of that chapter and say that we are literal branches?
Of course not. Also, in this very context of ch. 6, Jesus repeatedly says that He is bread (Jn 6:32-35,48,51).
Jesus, in fact, makes a transition from their literal use of the term to His metaphorical use: “They said therefore
to Him, „Lord, evermore give us this [literal] bread.‟ Jesus said to them, „I am the [metaphorical] bread of
life; he who comes to Me shall not hunger, and he who believes in Me shall never thirst.‟” How can we be so
dogmatic in saying that work means literal work in this context when bread does not mean literal bread a few
verses later? Why unnecessarily pose a conflict between Jesus and Paul? Why not just admit that Jesus takes
their phrase and uses it ironically to show that they are missing the point in thinking that the condition for
eternal life is a work?

Clear Speech
     Paul and his readers certainly did not regard saving faith to be a work in any true sense of the word. We
submit, therefore, that Jesus is not using the word work in its normal fashion. Rather, He uses a play on words
to use it to point to the will of God to show that what they must do is believe rather than literally work. The
work of God is that work not be considered work in the normal sense of the word. There are those who adopt
the Calvinistic mindset who at this point would quote Art Farstad again: “In John 6:28, after Jesus fed the
5,000 with the five loaves and two fishes, the Jews asked Him, „What shall we do, that we may work the works
of God?‟ A very good question deserving a clear, concise answer!”
     It is then retorted that understanding Jesus as speaking ironically would not qualify as a clear or concise
answer. On the one hand, one is inclined to respond that if the populace in general did not regard faith a work,
as Paul‟s statements lead us to suspect, then they should be able to discern the meaning readily enough. In a
few moments, Jesus will in fact give one of the most clear and concise answers ever made: “Truly, truly, I say
to you, he who believes in Me has eternal life” (Jn 6:47; MT). On the other hand, one is left puzzled by the
sentiment that assumes that Jesus must speak blandly in order to answer appropriately. To be sure, Paul said
that he ought to speak forth the mystery of Christ clearly. He was under obligation to make it clear (Col 4:4).
But where do we read that Jesus was under obligation to speak clearly? In fact, it is His enemies who think that
they have a right to impose upon Him to speak clearly: “The Jews therefore gathered around Him, and were
saying to Him, "How long will You keep us in suspense? If You are the Christ, tell us plainly” (Jn 10:24; cp.
8:25). Do those today who demand that Jesus speak plainly in the text in calling faith a work make themselves
an enemy of the text?
     They certainly are not doing justice to the context. Have they not read that in the very chapter where Jesus
commences this discussion by calling faith a work that He pours on the metaphoric language so strong in
picturing faith as eating His flesh and drinking His blood that many, even of His followers, will stop following
Him? His very own followers acknowledge: “This is a difficult statement; who can listen to it?” (Jn 6:60).
What is clear to many of us was not clear to many of them. If Jesus does not feel compelled to make His
                           For further explanation, see my upcoming books The Outer Darkness and Believe.
                                                  Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                      Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                                    5


sayings just as easy as possible for His followers in the past, can we be so certain that He feels under
obligation to make them just as plain as possible for His followers in the present? Did He not warn us that He
speaks in parables to conceal the truth from those who do not have eyes to see or ears to hear (Mt 13:13;
Lk 8:10)? Claiming that Jesus clearly equates faith with work is like the Sunday School teacher I heard who
claimed that Jesus spoke in parables to make the truth so clear that it would be easy for everyone to understand
it. Not so!
     Jesus may not be using parables in GJ, but He is certainly not limiting Himself to speaking plainly either.
When He challenged His critics to destroy the temple, they did not understand what He meant because He was
making a word play on the word temple that even His disciples would not understand until years later (Jn 2:18-
22). In the next chapter, when Nicodemus comes to Him, Jesus tells him that he must be born anothen. This
could mean again or from above and leaves Nicodemus scratching his head. Is it physical or spiritual, literal or
metaphorical? Jesus does not clear up the matter greatly for Nicodemus by titling Himself Son of Man and
comparing Himself to a serpent on a pole (Jn 3:13-14). In the next chapter, we encounter a Samaritan woman
who is trying to figure out how He is going to get living water out of a well without a bucket. We pat ourselves
on the back for understanding that living water does not literally refer to running water, but then think that
faith in Jn 6:29 is literally a work, in the very chapter where many of His followers grumble and stumble over
His words because they take His metaphors for faith literally rather than metaphorically (Jn 6:61)! It seems that
His modern day followers are still stumbling over the metaphorical description of faith in this passage in
considering it a literal work. Jesus speaks so cryptically that His enemies cannot even understand when He is
talking about the Father (Jn 8:27). Although Jesus presents what we today consider a clear illustration about
the shepherd, John informs us, “This figure of speech Jesus spoke to them, but they did not understand what
those things were which He had been saying to them” (Jn 10:6). The misunderstanding is so bad that many of
His listeners think He is insane (Jn 10:20). It is in this context, that His enemies demand that He tell them
plainly who He is (Jn 10:24). He finally does so (Jn 10:30), but then turns right around and makes a play on the
word gods to escape being stoned. In the upper room, Jesus acknowledges that He has been speaking in
figurative language but will speak plainly (Jn 16:25). And here, in the closing words of His final discourse
with His disciples before He is to be crucified, we finally almost hear a sigh of relief from His disciples as they
say: “Lo, now You are speaking plainly, and are not using a figure of speech” (Jn 16:29). Those who insist that
faith must clearly be a work in the heart of all this figurative speech are failing to take the context seriously.

Not a Work
     We are therefore in firm agreement with Olson‟s comments on Jn 6:29: “Some have mistakenly thought
He was saying that faith is a work. Nothing could be farther from the truth! Rather, He was seeking to wean
them away from their works-obsessed mindset. Faith is to be set in contradistinction to works in order to
maintain the grace principle of salvation (Rom. 4:16)” (Calvinism, 262). Govett likewise responds concerning
this verse “Is faith a „work‟ No! It is in contrast to works. But our Lord uses it by way of allusion to their
question” (John, 252). Those who cannot see the allusion are bound to see an illusion. They will imagine that
faith is actually a work when in fact they are seeing a mirage caused by not carefully considering the shifts in
the context or the appeal to normal usage in the Pauline texts.

Summary
    Although faith might be regarded as a work of God in the literal sense of being the response required by
God, the fact that it is called the work of God rather than will of God is due to contextual factors that cause the
word work to intersect the semantic sphere of normal usage only metaphorically. The work of God is actually
the will of God in this context. It is not literally a work but simply refers to faith metaphorically so that faith is
not regarded as a work by the One requiring it. The Lord uses irony to make a word play that uses their own
terminology to expose the antonymity of their works-oriented mentality with what is actually required by God.
The Lord requires faith as opposed to works. We therefore find the Lord‟s intended meaning to be in complete
harmony with Paul who insists that soteriological faith is not a work. Saving faith is not a work of God or of
man. It is simply not to be taken literally as a work.
    1
        See Doxological Versus Misthological Amorality.
    2
        See “Faith is a Response that God Requires from Us” in The Outer Darkness.
                            For further explanation, see my upcoming books The Outer Darkness and Believe.
                                                   Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
                                                                                                                       6



    3
       Godet would call it a genitive of reference so that it “designates not the author of the work (Augustine), but the
one with reference to whom it is done: the question is of the work which God requires” (John, 580; emphasis his).
In either case, it denotes what God requires.
     4
       See Gift of God. For those who still insist upon a genitive of source, we point out that in that case it would
have to be a genitive of co-source. Faith is synergistically produced in us by God and us. As noted in Gift of God,
this statement is true theologically, but I am very skeptical that this affirmation is the point being made contextually.




                            For further explanation, see my upcoming books The Outer Darkness and Believe.
                                                   Marty A. Cauley © Copyright 2009
                                                       Misthologist@misthology.org
